Abstracts

Asia

South Korea Korea National Health and Nutrition Serum 25-OHD Application

Examination Survey (KNHANES) [2019] concentration

Taiwan

Taiwan; Nutrition and Health Survey in Estimated intake Application

Taiwan (NAHSIT)

(microgram)

Supplementation

usage

China

China Health and Nutrition Survey

Estimated intake Application

(CHNS)

(microgram)

Japan

National Health & Nutrition Survey

Estimated intake Application

[1994-2020]

(microgram)

Philippines FNRI National Nutrition Survey [2019] Serum 25-OHD N/A

concentration

Estimated intake

(microgram)

India

National Nutritional Survey [2016-18] Serum 25-OHD N/A

concentration

Africa

*Vitamin D data was not collected/reported in national nutrition surveys from South Africa

(SANHANES), Kenya (KNMS), Nigeria (NNHS), Ghana (GMS), Ethiopia (NBS), Uganda (DHS/

NS) & Tanzania (TNNS).

Oceania

Australia

Australian Health Survey- Biomedical Serum 25-OHD Open

results for Nutrients [2011-12]

concentration

New Zealand Vitamin D Status of New Zealand

Serum 25-OHD Open

Adults (from New Zealand Adult

concentration

Nutrition Survey) [2008-09]

* 25-OHD: 25-hydroxyvitamin D concentration (nmol/L). N/A - raw data not accessible

recorded either serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25-OHD) concentration (nmol/L) or estimated Vitamin D intake from interviews/food diaries.
Additionally, Vitamin D data was rarely collected in lowincome countries such as Africa. Data mapping has outlined disease reporting standards in countries and has emphasised the systematic differences between healthcare systems. Conclusion Vitamin D data can be combined with COVID19 incidence and mortality data, to explore the relationship between Vitamin D and COVID-19. Further research can explore inter-individual differences in Vitamin D requirements, optimal therapeutic doses required and how individual requirements can be determined. Findings will improve disease pathway understanding, support the generation of aetiological hypotheses and contribute to COVID-19 prevention and treatment. Substandard diagnosis and reporting in low-middle income countries underestimates disease rates, compared to high income countries. Studies investigating countries across income levels may therefore be affected by case-ascertainment bias, however also highlight where future resources should be directed to improve overall health and reduce inequalities, as well as reducing the burden of COVID-19.

15

DIETARY PATTERNS AND ITS ASSOCIATION WITH

PERCEIVED STRESS DURING COVID-19 PANDEMIC

SITUATION: A COMMUNITY-BASED STUDY AMONG

BANGLADESHI ADULTS

Tasnim Rahman Disu*. Institute of Public Health Nutrition, Mohakhali, Dhaka, Bangladesh

10.1136/bmjnph-2022-summit2022.18

A10

Background The world witnessed a dramatic disruption in our daily lives due to COVID-19 pandemic and Bangladesh is no exception. Such kind of public health crisis instigated by pandemics & its repercussion can elicit significant negative emotions, in line with stress, changed dietary patterns and weakened immune system. All these are inter-linked. As there were merely such studies in Bangladesh, this study aimed to find out association between dietary patterns and perceived stress level of urban adults during COVID-19 pandemic. Objectives This study intended to find out the association between dietary patterns and perceived stress level among adults in Bangladesh as well as their dietary patterns and perceived stress level during COVID-19 pandemic. Methods A Cross-sectional study was conducted among 300 adults (aged 18 years) of three urban communities in Dhaka city of Bangladesh from February 2021 to June 2021. A semistructured questionnaire using purposive convenience sampling based on the Perceived Stress Scale (PSS) and minimum dietary diversity for individual adult, 24 hours recall by face to face interviews ensuring proper protective precautions. Measures included baseline and personal characteristics, perceived stress levels, dietary patterns. Data were analyzed by using latest SPSS software. Results The results showed moderate level of perceived stress among majority of the population with approximate one-in ten (12.0%) and one-fourths (22.0%) of the respondents with a low and high level of stress, respectively. It also revealed the association of perceived stress level with several sociodemographic factors such as age group (p<0.026), employment status (p<0.001), monthly income (p<0.044) and sleep quality (p<0.001). Significant association between dietary patterns (egg consumption) and perceived stress level (p<0.036) was identified which is distinguishable to reliance on availability & affordability of the source. Those having poor sleep quality were more likely to get stress and changed dietary patterns (AOR=2.147; 95% CI: 1.153-3.997; p=0.00). Conclusions As higher stress level is associated with less healthy eating behavior and dietary patterns leading to poor nutritional status, proper evidential reasoning can go a long way to emphasize the concern. It will be a prolific initiative if policymakers merge nutrition-related public health interventions along with stress management programs through multisectoral collaboration.

16

NUTRITIONAL EVALUATION OF RECIPE POST ON

INSTAGRAM SHARED BY DIETITIANS

1Merve Oksuz, 2Elif Inan-Eroglu*. 1Ankara Medipol University, Ankara, Turkey; 2University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia

10.1136/bmjnph-2022-summit2022.19

Background Nowadays, dietitians widely use social media tools such as Instagram in order to build their clientele as well as share healthy eating tips and recipes. Objectives This study aimed to evaluate the nutritional content of recipes shared by dietitians on Instagram. Methods Instagram accounts of Turkish dietitians who had a blue tick (known as the Instagram verified sticker) in their account and more than 100,000 followers were included. We determined the last 10 Instagram recipe posts of each dietitian and divided them into 7 categories according to their content: main dish, soup, healthy bakery products, breakfast, salads,

bmjnph 2022;5(Suppl 2):A1-A15

BMJNPH: first published as 10.1136/bmjnph-2022-summit2022.18 on 18 October 2022. Downloaded from http://nutrition.bmj.com/ on November 17, 2022 by guest. Protected by copyright.

