I

NEW BOOKS

eredity and the Social Problem Group. By E. J. Lidbetter. Vol. i. ?^P* 159, with 26 illustrations. London: Edward Arnold & Co.
I933- Price 21s.
During the last twenty-five years the author has had unique
?Pportunities for investigating such as were in receipt of public
j*ssistance with a view to discovering whether or not in their case
reditary factors were responsible for their poverty and dependence, he data gleaned in this investigation are to be presented in several v?lumes of which the present is the first. This contains 26 pedigrees
^th descriptive matter and statistical material thereon. Associated
each pedigree is a table showing the Poor Law history of those lndividuals who are in receipt of public assistance and estimating t*le'r total chargeability to public funds. The author states that no attempt will be made, until all the material has been issued, to draw |nferences or conclusions from the facts disclosed. Nevertheless, it 's quite plain that, in the opinion of the author, it is to inherited e ects of mind or body that we must look for the chief explanation
0 that mass of poverty with which the Poor Law has hitherto been
Cor>cerned. Those who would prefer to think that inequality of opportunity
and a harsh environment are in themselves sufficient reasons for the Creation of the social problem group can at least assume that the author of this book is fully aware that environment has its children as
^eU as heredity, and can study the pedigrees which are offered for niselves. And they are well worth the study, for this volume is a contribution to sociology of real importance. The book cannot be
Regarded by anyone who is seriously concerned with the health and general welfare of our people.

le Nature and
Pp. xvi + 306.
12s. 6d.

Treatment London:

of Amentia. By L. Pierce Clark. Bailliere, Tindall & Cox. 1933. Price

The problem of mental deficiency is, admittedly, often of infinite

complexity both in regard to causation and treatment. Great advances

been made since the time of Itard and Seguin, but the majority

Qaveus have continued to accept such states as static and unchangeable

e^?ept for those slight modifications which may be effected by specialised

sses5 ^

and

by

intensive

habit and

occupational

training.

Clark,

^ever, has no such view, and in this highly original and unique

287

New Books

i

presentation he has attempted to show how far the psycho-analytic
principles of Freud may be. of service in understanding and modifying the behaviour of those suffering from mental defect. He believes that even when a definite organic injury is present that there are dynamic psychological factors at work which play an important part in the child's development. In support of his thesis he records an
excellent series of case studies, embracing all types of mental deficiency, which he has analysed and interpreted along Freudian lines. The chief fallacy of this work is that it is almost purely objective, as
naturally the patients were unable to co-operate satisfactorily in a subjective examination. It may be, therefore, that the theoretical
interpretations and deductions are often seriously at fault, and that a real danger exists in propounding hypotheses which another observer might view from an entirely different angle, but Clark deserves great praise for the boldness of his conception, for his ingenuity, and for the clarity with which he expounds his views.

I

An Outline of Immunity.
with 37 illustrations. Price 18s.

By W. W. C. Topley. Pp. viii + 416,
London: Edward Arnold & Co. 1933-

The subject-matter of this book is derived in great part from the larger Principles of Bacteriology and Immunity by the author in collaboration with Professor G. S. Wilson. In rewriting those sections relating to immunological theory and practice Professor Topley has
amplified some subjects and compressed others, so that the present volume is a new text-book, complete in itself. It presents a very full exposition of current knowledge on this rapidly advancing science. The aim of the author has been to review the evidence of important work on each topic and to sum up the inferences which may be drawn.
This method is to be commended, but the resulting volume tends to become a work of reference rather than a text-book for medical
students. Its value as the former is enhanced by a more complete bibliography than is usual in an outline of this kind. An early
chapter is devoted to a simple exposition of statistical methods as applied to the data of immunity. The mechanisms of infection and immunity are then dealt with in considerable detail, the newer
conceptions of herd-infection and herd-immunity which arise from the author's own studies being presented. The book concludes with chapters on the applications of immunity to diagnosis, prophylaxis and treatment, together with an indication of the methods employed in standardising immunological reagents. Essentially practical in their bearings these sections present to the clinician as well as to the laboratory workers a concise account of the application of
288

New Books lmrr|unological tests, and of the specific methods of prophylaxis and
treatment now available. The book is to be recommended with
a^dconfidence to all engaged in clinical research on infective disease,
0 workers in bacteriological laboratories, to post-graduate students
to all who desire for reference a concise and authoritative account
0 any aspect of immunology. ?rganic Chemistry. By F. Sherwood Taylor. Pp. xii + 587.
London : William Heinemann Ltd. 1933. Price 10s. 6d. Dr Taylor has written an admirable text-book of organic chemistry, ?ugh not for the readers to whom it is especially addressed? ?tudents of medicine. For these the book is far too detailed, and in act> in those sections which are of particular interest to the medical student and of definitely less importance to the science student, the
^formation presented is not always accurate. Thus the relationship
ctween haemoglobin and its derivatives is incorrectly stated, and much more is known of the constitution of the related pigment chlorophyll than the author gives; the stages in the breakdown of sugar to
ctic acid or alcohol are certainly not as stated; urea is hydrolysed . ^ a specific enzyme urease, not by various enzymes known as ureases;
1
js not true that herbivora excrete hippuric acid in place of the uric acid of carnivora; in the purification of enzymes it is necessary to use
Pr combination of various methods?precipitation, adsorption, etc.?
lch are mutually supplementary rather than alternative. / , Baylor is much more at home in the more "pure" portions
lch, indeed, constitute the bulk of the book) of organic chemistry, ere accuracy is combined with lucidity of treatment?greatly aided J explanatory diagrams?to produce a book which should prove most Useful to the junior science student of the university or the senior student at school reading for scholarship examinations. ^ special word of praise is due to the publishers for the production so well-printed a book at so low a price.
289

