224- Dr Jones on Hemorrhage from divided Arteries. April

III.

A Treatife on the Procefs employed by Nature in fupprej/ing the Hemorrhage from divided and punctured Arteries ; and on the
Ufe of the Ligature; concluding with Obfervations on Secondary Hemorrhage ; the whole deduced from an extenfive Series of Ex-
perimentSy and illujirated by 15 Plates. By J. F. D. Jones, M. D. Member of the Royal College of Surgeons of London.
8vo. pp. 237. London. 1805.

J'ur curiofity, early attracted by the importance of the fub-

je?ts announced in the title, has been amply gratified by the

perufal of this interefting volume, which has left upon our

minds very favourable imprefiions of the critical judgment of the

author, as well as of his talent for experimental inquiry.

Few fa?ts in phyfiology are more curious, or more interefting

to the naturalift, than thofe which belong to the fubject of ani-

mal reproduction : There are few of higher importance to the

furgeon, for this knowledge points out to him, in many cafes,

at once the obje?t and the limits of his art. The proceiles em-

ployed by nature in the reproduction and reunion of feparated

parts are the faireft fubjeCts of experimental inquiry, and the

labours of many ingenious men have accordingly been reward-

ed by the deriving of new and important faCts. The ob-

fervations and experiments of Duhamel, Haller, Troyes, and

M'Donald ; of Murray, Huhn, and Hunter ; of Cruickftianks and

of Haighton, leave, indeed, little to defire in the departments

which they have examined.

From the molt perfeCt restoration of ?i loft or amputated part,

to the cicatrization of the fimplcft wound, we obferve a uni-

formity in the attempts of nature at reproduction, or a feries of

analogous events, which expound to us the procefles of nature

in the reproduction and reunion of the bones, and of moft jof the

foft parts of animals. The procefs employed by nature in fup-

preffing the hemorrhage from divided arteries, though perhaps

of all the moft important to be fully underftood, has not been

fo perfectly explained. Experiments and obfervations, indeed,

have not been more neglected here; badly imagined, however,

and limited in their direction, by the influence of fome hypo-

thecs to be confirmed or refuted, they leave us ftill uncertain of

the truth. Some fteps of the procefs have been feen or affirmed,

while others, equally important and efficient, have been over-

1

looked

ISOS. Dr Jones on Hemorrhage from divided Arteries.

225

looked or denied. Limited obfervation, and the inclination to

iimplify the mechanilm of nature, have led to theories founded cn lome'one or other of the fleps of the entire procefs; and hemorrhage has been iuppofed to be naturally flopped by an obturating clot of blood, by the cdntra?fcion and crifpation of the divided artery itfelf, or by the tumefaction or injection of ,the furrounding cellular fubftanee. The limited theories of Petit-, of Morand, and of Pouteau, gave rife to other Subordinate

hvpothefes not more fatisfadiory. Diftruiting, then, thefe refults of partial obfervation and of hafly conjecture ?, to arrive at the truth, it was neceffary again to confult natufe herfelf, and by a feries of obfervations and experiments, carried on through every
ftage of the procefs, from the firft effufion of blood to the natural fuppreffion of the. hemorrhage, and complete cicatrization of the wounded artery, to mark the various changes which take place, and the order in which they fucceed : a talk which has been undertaken and executed, with equal zeal, ability, aiid fuccefs, by Dr Jones.
The experiments are numerous, but not redundant; they are well imagined, fkilfully executed, and, to all appearance, faithfully related. The refults are alfo exhibited in 15 neat engravings. The experiments are compared with, and his obfervations are afterwards illuflrated and confirmed by thofe of other eminent phy~ fiologills and furgeons : For the error of his predeceffors feems to have been chiefly that of feizing exclufively one flep of the procefs of nature which they really did obferve, and of haftily concluding that they had nothing farther to look for. So far, indeed, as they did obferve, their obfervation was correct and accurate ; but this being limited to fome particular period of the procefs, they differently faw the corresponding ftcps of a feries of changes, which really conflitute the procefs of nature in fuppreffing the hemorrhage from divided or wounded arteries.
Dr Jones having examined and freely expofed the defeats of Petit, Morand, Sharp, Pouteau, Gooch, Kirkland, and J. Bell, proceeds in the relation of a feries of experiments on the arteries of horfes and dogs, undertaken with the view of ascertaining the procefs employed by nature in the fuppreffion of hemorrhage
from divided arteries, and the order of the events which confli-

tute it. In thefe experifnents the larger arteries were Completely divided ?, the fuppreffion of the hemorrhage was left to nature, and the condition of the divided vefTel was, in the different cafes,

afcertained by careful examination, at different periods,' after the

firfl ceffation of the hemorrhage. Though we muft refer, to the

original for a full detail of thofe experiments, we ihall here

quote the following as examples.

.vol. ii. no. G.

P

Experiment

226 Dr Jones on Hemorrhage from divided Arteries. April

EXPERIMENT VII.

' The femoral artery of a dog was divided, and the integuments were brought together, as in Experiment II., the feftion of the artery being made as high as it was detached. Half an hour after the hemorrhage had completely ceafed, the dog was drowned.
* Diffeftion. A confiderable clot of blood was found between the
integuments and the artery, covering both of its cut extremities, and adhering to the lower, and to the parts about it: the extremities of the artery were nearly an inch diftant from each other: a black cylindrical coagulum was found Hopping up the mouth of the upper extremity, and extending at leaft one third of an inch down from it, and between the vein and nerve. The mouth of this extremity was flightly contra&ed. The divifion of the artery appeared to have been made immediately at its connexion with the cellular membrane ; this appearance was, no doubt, rendered more complete by the retra&ion which had taken place. There was an effufion of blood between the
artery and its fheath, to the extent of at leall two inches: there was
alfo a confiderable effufion in the furrounding cellular membrane ; but the artery had not the flighteft appearance of being compreffed by it. On cutting open this part of the veffel, a long and very {lender coagulum of blood was found within it, which by no means filled up its
canal at any part, nor adhered to the internal coat of the artery.
Hereafter I fhall call this the internal coagulum, to diitinguifh it
from the external.
About four lines breadth of the inferior portion of the divided artery was detached from the furrounding cellular membrane ; its moutli was much more contra&ed than the upper, and was flightly turned on one fide; it adhered to the clot, which filled the wound, and lay over it j and the internal coagulum was very {lender and thready.'

EXPERIMENT XVII.

4 The carotid artery of a horfe was divided juft: above a ligature,

which had been made on it to prevent hemorrhage from that portion

of it next the heart, and the integuments were fecured by futures

previously pafled. The blood flowed too faft at two or three inter-

laces, but thefe were clofed by additional futures, and the external

hemorrhage prefently ceafed. A very large tumour inftantly formed,

but its fize confiderably diminished in the courfe of twenty-four hours.

The animal was killed fixty-fix hours after the operation.

' Dilfedti'on. The clot, which originally filled the cavity of the

wound, and diftended the integuments, had nearly difappeared, having

been either wafhed away by the difcharge or abforbed. The ends of

the artery were feparated between one and two inches. The fheath

was tinged with blood to the extent of many inches. To the cir-

cumference of the cut artery, and juft within it, the external coagu-

lum, confifting partly of lymph, partly of blood, adhered. Its

figure was conical, and it was fupported at the mouth of the artery by

??

m:

its

ISOo. Dr Jones on Hemorrhage from divided Arteries. 227

its intimate connexion with the inner lamina of the {heath, which, by the retraction of the ar'ery, formed a canal for it ; and it derived farther iupport, on all fides, from the blood effufed and coagulated
between the inner and outermoft lamina of the (heath. The internal
coagulum was an inch and a half long, correfponding to the diilance between the external coagulum and the fircollateral branch. It completely filled the canal of the artery, and had every appearance of having been formed foon after the operation, it was quite detached, and lay two inches above the external coagulum, having, in all probability, flipped from its original fituation in handling the parts previous to the artery being opened. See plate II. fig. 2.'
EXPERIMENT XIX.

' The femoral artery of a dog was divided, and the integuments were brought together in the manner already defcribed. The animal was killed nine days after the operation.
i DiffeCtion. The wound was open, but its extent much di-
minifhed. Its furface was formed of a thick layer of very vafcular lymph, which, being divided, difcovered the truncated extremities of the artery half an inch apart. The cellular membrane furrounding each extremity of the artery, for the Ipace of an inch, was very much thickened with coagulated lymph. The fuperior portion of the artery was (lightly contracted at its extremity, which was completely elofed, and filled up with lymph. From this clofed extremity extended, about two lines breadth, a fmall rounded whitifh fubftance, of the confidence of jelly, which, probably, was the remains of the external coagulum not yet abCurbed. Within this portion of artery we found a fmall conical coagulum of blood, attached at its bafe to the lymph that clofed the mouth of the artery, but not adhering to, nor even appearing to touch,, any other point of its internal furface.
* The inferior extremity of the artery was much more contracted than the fuperior, its termination being very diftinCtly of the figure of a cone. On cutting it open, we found its mouth completely contracted, and adhering to the lymph that clofed it. An internal coagulum, funilar to that of the fuperior portion of the artery, was attached to this lymph. The coats of both portions of the artery were very much thickened. See plate I. fig. 4>''

Not one, then, but a variety of circumftances confpires in the natural fupprelFion of the hemorrhage from divided arteries. The
divided artery retra?ts and contracts ; the force of the circulation, after the firft impetuous flow of blood, is gradually weakened and reduced ; the blood is effufed into the cellular fubftance,

and the fheath within which the divided artery had retracted j

the effufed blood is here entangled, and the foundation laid for

the formation of a coagulum, which fills the {heath and cellular

membrane, and eventually clofes up the mouth of the artery ;

2

and

228 Dr Jones on Hemorrhage from divided Arteries. April

and this, which is termed the external coagulum, is the firft complete barrier to the effufion of blood. " This coagulum, viewed externally, appears like a continuation of the artery, but, on cutting up the artery, its termination can be diftin?tly feen with the coagulum completely fhutting up its mouth, and en-
clofed in its Iheath."

The next Itep in the procefs is the formation of the internal coagulum, the clot within the artery, a llender conical clot which
lies loofe in the arterial canal, and connected with the artery
only by its bafe, which, by its circumference, is llightly attached to the divided extremity of the vefiel. The formation of this internal coagulum, however, appears to be merely a contingent event in the procefs, and depends on the ceflation of the circu-
lation in that part of the artery which lies between the firft col-
lateral branch and the divided extremity, after that extremity has been clofed, and the hemorrhage {topped by the external coagulum. The figure and fize of the internal coagulum vary according to the remotenefs of the ??firft collateral branch, and where this goes off very near to the divided extremity of the
artery, the internal clot is often not to be found. " The internal
coagulum contributes nothing to the fuppreffion of hemorrhage in ordinary accidents, becauie its formation is uncertain, or, when formed, it rarely fills the canal of the artery, or, if it fills the canal, does not adhere to the internal coat of the artery."
Soon after, there is obferved, between the external and in-

ternal coagula, a layer of coagulable lymph, poured out by the

inflamed veffels of the cut extremity of the artery, to the internal

Coat of which this coagulum of lymph is firmly united. And

now, by the gradual contraction of the artery, and by the effu-

fion of lymph, thefe parts become intimately blended together ;

the canal of the artery is obliterated, and its extremity loll in the

furrounding parts. Thus, the temporary fuppreflion of the

hemorrhage is accomplifhed by the retraction and contraftion of

the artery, and by the formation of the coagula, or clots of blood ;

permanent fecurity is, afterwards obtained by the effufion, con-

folidation, and organization of coagulable lymph. The artery,

however, gradually undergoes other changes : " Its obliterated

extremity no longer allowing the blood to circulate through it,

the portion which lies between it and the firih lateral branch is

no more diftended and excited to action as formerly, but gra-

dually contra&s, till at length its cavity is entirely obliterated,

and its condenfed tunics aflitme a ligamentous appearance."-

? At the fame time, the remarkable appearances at the extremity

of the artery are undergoing a confiderable change*, the external

coagulum of blood, which, in the firft inftance, had flopped the

i.*' -

hemorrhage,

i HOG. Dr Jones cn Hemorrhage from divided Arteries.

229

hemorrhage, is abforbed in the courfe of a few days, and the coagulating lymph which had been effufed around it, a id had. produced a thickened and almoft cartilaginous appearance in the parts, is gradually removed, and they again appear more or lefs completely reftored to their cellular texture."
Such is the outline of the procefs employed by nature for the fuppreflion of hemorrhage from divided arteries, as more fully deduced by our author from his own experiments and obfervations, and which he very happily illullrates and confirms by a judicious expofition and criticifm of fome of the- obfervations of Pouteau, Kirkland, Morand, Gooch, Haller, and others.
Let us conclude, then, with Dr Jones, that " we can no
longer confider the fuppreflion of hemorrhage as a fimple, a mere mechanical effect, but as a procefs prepared by the concurrent and fucceffive operations of many caufes : Thefe may be briefly dated to confilt in the refraction and contraftion of the artery, the formation of a coagulum at its mouth, die inflammation and confolidation of its extremity by an effufi'on of coagulable lymph within its canal, between its tunics, and in the cellular fubftance furrounding it."
We now pafs to the 2d chapter of this treatife :?u On the means which nature employs for fupprellmg hemorrhage from pwiEiured or partially divided arteries and on the procefs of reparation which takes place in thofe arteries."
The common confequence of a punctured artery, in man at leafl, is the formation of aneurifm *, and the experiments of this chapter were originally inftituted with the view of afcertaining the manner in which aneurifm is produced, and with little hope of witnefiing the complete and. perfect reunion of a partially
wounded artery. But Dr Jones found it very difficult to pro-
duce aneurifms in the arteries of horfes and dogs ; on the contrary, he discovered that, when the artery was fimply punctured, the wound often cicatrized by a procefs of reparation, its canal continuing pervious, and its functions entire \ or, when a larger portion of the circumference of the artery was wounded, that either the canal of the artery became obftructed, or that a complete divifion took place by laceration or ulceration.
We fhall take the 6th of this feries of experiments as an example of the cicatrization of a pun?tured artery.
EXPERIMENT VI,

" The carotid artery of a dog was laid bare, and a longitudinal

wound made in it with a lancet, without removing it at all from its

Situation or furronnding attachments ; a profufe hemorrhage followed ;

the integuments were fewed up as quickly as pofiible, and foon alter

they were found difcended with blood, and the hemorrhage ceafed.

3

" Nine

230 Dr Jones on Hemorrhage from divided Arteries. April
" Nine days after this experiment the animal was killed, and, on examining the parts, the external wound was found to be very nearly healed. Its furface was formed by a yafcular layer of lymph. The artery was injefted from the aorta, and the injection pafied very readily through it. As it had been wounded anteriorly, I cut open its posterior part, immediately oppofite to the wound. The canal of the artery and the injection were very fiightly narrowed jult at this part j the coats of the artery arid the furrounding cellular membrane were very much thickened. On picking away the portion of injection which palTed through this part of the artery, the longicudinal wound was feen to be completely cicatrized. There was a collateral branch filled with injedtion on one fide of it, and on the other a very thin lamina of lymph adhering to the internal furface of the artery. See plate V. fig. 3."
But if thefe animals had been longer preferved, if they had fully recovered their blood and health, if they had been allowed to return to their wonted freedom and exercife, might not thefe
cicatrized arteries have dilated into aneurifms ? However this
may be, the procefs of cicatrization, as deduced from thefe experiments, appears to be this :?The fheath becomes injected with blood ; the relative pofition of the pun?ture in the artery and in the fheath is altered, fo that they no longer oppofe each other y a layer of coagulated blood is confined by the fheath over the puncture in the artery, and forms the temporary barrier to farther hemorrhage. Lymph is now effufed under the coagulum of blood, and the procefs of reparation is completed in the ufual way, till permanent lecurity is obtained.
Though it appears, from Dr Jones's experiments, that the pundtured arteries of brute animals may thus be cicatrized, and their functions preferved entire, we are not to flatter ourfelves with equal fuccefs in the furgery of wounded arteries in man. Although there is fuch an appearance of cicatrix in a cafe quoted from Petit, we perfectly agree with Dr Jones, that in the treatment of a wounded artery, " in every cafe in which it can be done, it is bed to tie the artery above and below the wounded part, and to divide it between the ligatures."
Chapter 3dOn the operation of the ligature ; fhowing that
its immediate effe?t is to divide the middle and internal coats of
an arterv which gives rife to the adhefive inflammation." The experiments contained under this head are novel, and
highly interefting. In thefe, after expofmg the arteries, ligatures were paffed round them, and tied in the ufual way, but, immediately afterwards, loofened and withdrawn j the freedom of circulation was inftantly reftored, and the blood pafied through the artery as before the application of the ligature. Yet, very ftiortly after, the artery became obftru?ted, and was eventually
cicatrized

3 S06. Dr Jones on Hemorrhagefrom divided Arteries.

231

cicatrized for fome way above and below where the ligature had operated, and that as effe&ually as if the ligature had been fuffered to remain. The procefs by which this is brought about feems to confift of the following parts : The internal and middle coats of the artery are torn or divided by the ligature, an obfervation firft made by Deflault, and confirmed by Mr Thomfon , and by Dr Jones the divided coats inflame ?, coagulable lymph is poured out fo abundantly as to obftru?t the arterial canal; above and below this obftru&ing coagulated lymph there are formed internal clots, or coagula of blood, as far as the firft collateral branches, which complete the obftruction, and at length all this portion of the artery becomes cicatrized, with the circumftances more fully expofed by our author in the next chapter, " On the procefs of adhefion, and the changes which an artery finally undergoes, in confequence of the application of the ligature."
In the experiments undertaken with a view to the inveftigation of this procefs, the ligatures were applied in the ufual manner, and allowed to remain, the artery being, in fome, divided between two ligatures, and allowed to retra?l, and, in other cafes, left undivided.
From the whole of Dr Jones's experiments, it appears that the effects of tying an artery properly are,
]/?, To cut through the internal and middle coats of the artery, and to bring the wounded furfaces into perfe?t oppofition.
2d, To occafion a determination of blood on the collateral branches.
3dy To allow of the formation of a coagulum of blood juft within the artery, provided a collateral branch is not very near the ligature.
4th, To excite inflammation on the internal and middle coats of the artery by having cut them through, and confequently to give rife to an effufion of lymph, by which the wounded furfaces are united, and the canal is rendered impervious; to produce a fimultaneous inflammation on the correfponding external lurface of the artery, by which it becomes very much thickened with effufed lymph *, and, at the fame time, from the expofure and inevitable wounding of the furrounding parts, to occafion inflam^ mation in them, and an efFufion of lymph, which covers the artery, and forms the furface of the wound.
5th, To produce ulceration in the part of the artery round which the ligature is immediately applied, viz. its external coat.
6th, To produce indirectly a complete obliteration not only of the canal of the artery, but even of the artery itfelf, to the col-
lateral branches on both fides of the part which has been tied. 7th,

Dr Jones on Hemorrhage from divided Arteries. April
7thy To give rife to an enlargement of the collateral
branches.
A knowledge of the changes which an artery undergoes, in confequence of the application of the ligature, explains to us, at the fame time, its occasional failure, and initru?ls us how to avoid fome of the caufes of fecondary hemorrhage ; thofe, at leafl, which depend on the improper form and application of the ligature. And, with fome very pertinent remarks on this fubje?t, I)r Jones brings his treatife to a clofe.
It is proved by fome experiments of Dr Jones, that, to produce thofe changes in the artery which terminate in the adhefion of its coats and obliteration of its canal, which it is our obje?t to attain by the proper application of the ligature, it is necefTary that the internal and middle coats of the artery be completely divided.by the ligature; and hence that form and mode of application, which are belt calculated to produce this requifite diviiion of the internal coats, mull be preferred. Large flat ligatures are therefore improper 5 round ligatures, which are fmall and fuffjciently firm, are preferable ; they ihould be perfeftly regular. No part ought to be included in the ligature but the artery. Care {hould be taken to tie the ligature with fufRcient force, and always as nearly as poflible in the direction perpendicular to the
axis of the artery. The artery itfelf ihould, in every cafe, be as
little as poffible detached from the. neighbouring parts ; and, if experience has difcovered any advantage in the mode of tying and dividing the artery between two ligatures, Dr Jones is difpofed to think that this advantage confifls in the artery being
tied clofe to the part at which its connexion with the furround-
ing cellular membrane is complete ; whereas, when a fingle ligature is ufed, a confiderable portion of the artery is detached, and the ligature, pprhaps, applied in the centre ; or, if applied at the upper end, flill there remains a confiderable portion of detached artery below it.
From the foregoing analyfis, our readers will be enabled to anticipate the general merits of this excellent treatife. To us it
appears a work of uncommon merit, and we doubt not our
judgment will be confirmed by every one who, after an attentive perufal, confiders the unufual labour bellowed upon it, the great number of fa?ls contained in it, the excellence of the plan by which all thofe fails are arranged, the precife and accurate developement of the mod important procefles, of which very inadequate and confufed notions had been formerly entertained, and the induftry and fidelity with which they have been illuftrated by the fcattered fa?ls relating to thefe collected from the writings of others.
IV.

