CASE OF EPITHELIOMA OF THE UPPER PORTION OF THE (ESOPHAGUS SUCCESSFULLY TREATED
BY GASTROSTOMY AND TRACHEOTOMY.f
By DAVID NEWMAN, M.D., Glasgow.
At a meeting of the Glasgow Medico-Chirurgical Society, held on the 9th January last, I showed a case very much the same
as the one about to be described. In both instances the
tumour occupied a position immediately behind the larynx,
t Shown at the Pathological and Clinical Society of lilasarow on tne zutn
April, 1891.

432 Dr. Newman?Epithelioma of the (Esophagus
and the symptoms developed very rapidly, requiring gastrostomy to be performed at an early stage in the course of the
disease.
The history of the case now under consideration is brief. The patient, Mrs. C., set 43, consulted me on the 11th December, when 1 found her to be suffering from an epithelioma of the cesophagus immediately behind the larynx, and I recommended her to go into the Royal Infirmary, which she did on the 23rd December, 1890. She complained of difficulty in swallowing and slight pain in the throat, which sometimes extended to the ears. On enquiring into the history of the case, it appears that she has always enjoyed good health, with the exception of trivial ailments, until the beginning of November, when she complained of dryness at the back of
her throat. On examination her medical attendant discovered
the pharynx to be deeply congested, and a small ulcer was
seen a little to the left of the middle line. Under treatment
the condition of the throat improved, the ulcer treated up, and she felt much easier. A few days after this recovery took place she again consulted her doctor on account of difficulty in swallowing. He passed a probang into the oesophagus, and " felt an obstruction on withdrawing it," and he noticed that the bougie wras stained with blood. Slight haemorrhage continued for some hours. Her attendant, Dr. Drysdale, suspected malignant disease, but, owing to the sudden onset of the symptoms, and the almost complete absence of pain, he felt reluctant in expressing an opinion regarding the nature of the disease, and advised the patient to consult me. When I saw her for the first time, on the 11th December, 1890, she was weak, anaemic, and much emaciated,
and stated that for the last three weeks she had been unable to take any solid food, but was still able to take fluid and semi-fluid diet with ease. She told me that since the middle
of JNovember the symptoms have steadily become worse, and that, during the last six weeks, she has lost considerably in weight; and, although she could not give me exact figures, she believed that she had lost twenty-eight pounds. On examination I discovered a hard, firm swelling immediately behind the cricoid cartilage, and extending from the level of the
vocal cords downwards for a distance of about an inch and
a half. It was found impossible even to pass a small-sized bougie; but, on examination with the laryngoscope, no encroachment of the lumen of the air-passage was observed either by pressure from behind or by invasion of wall of the larynx. The voice was perfect and the movements of the

successfully treated by Gastrostomy and Tracheotomy. 433
cords complete. On palpation externally not only was the tumour described above apparent, but there were also several small, firm swellings, the largest of which was about the size of an almond, and was situated to the right of the thyroid cartilage, where it was firmly adherent and imbedded in the surrounding structures.
29th January.?The first stage of gastrostomy was performed to-day in the same way as described in the case of W. H.,* and, on the 5th February, a small galvano-cautery point was introduced through the exposed wall of the stomach, and a No. 2 gum elastic catheter was passed into the stomach through the opening thus made.
%7tk February.?During the last four weeks the patient
has made very satisfactory progress, and now feels much ?stronger than she did previous to the operation, even although she has been unable to take any food by the mouth. On account of the very weak condition of the patient since admission, no accurate observations have been made as regards body weight. Her friends who visit her say that they observe a considerable improvement in her appearance. Since the operation was completed the patient has been fed entirely by
the stomach-tube, and now one, the diameter of a No. 18
oesophageal bougie, has been introduced, so that the patient feeds herself by means of a filler. All her food, with the exception of purely albuminous diet, is masticated carefully before it is passed into the stomach. Occasionally she complains of considerable pain in the neck, especially on the right side, also in the right ear, but this is generally relieved by the employment of a linament composed of equal parts of camphor and hydrate of chloral. Until to-day the food given by the stomach was supplemented by nutriment administered by the rectum, but now the patient is so well as no longer to require
this.
21st March.?An examination of the throat, made to-day, showed the right vocal cord to be fixed in the position of complete adduction, and the lumen of the larynx was encroached upon by the posterior wall being pressed forwards by the tumour in the gullet; but still the air space was sufficient to allow a plentiful supply of air. She had been walking about the ground of the Infirmary for more than a week, and as her general health was now much improved, she was allowed to visit her friends in Glasgow before returning
home.
28tli March.?Since patient was dismissed the weather has
* Glasgow Medical Journal, March, 1891.

434 Dr. Newman?Epithelioma of the Oesophagus.
been extremely cold, and a few days after she left the hospital she contracted a " cold," and by the time she was brought to the ward dyspnoea was very marked, and inspiration was
associated with considerable stertor?so much so, that my
assistant, Dr. M'K. Dewar, who was called to see the case, at once performed tracheotomy. The low operation was done after injecting the soft parts with a solution of cocaine.
18th April.?Since tracheotomy was performed the patient has greatly improved in strength and appearance, and now, although she gets no food by the mouth, and only a little air passes otherwise than by the tracheotomy tube, she suffers from little discomfort beyond the pain in the neck and right
ear.
She went home on the 25th April.
Remarks.?One of the most marked features in this case is
the very rapid onset of the symptoms, and the sudden development of dysphagia, which was so rapid as to raise a doubt whether the disease was inflammatory or malignant in its nature. This sudden difficulty in swallowing is probably the result of two circumstances?first, the disease involves the narrowest and least distensible part of the oesophagus; second, the action of the muscles of deglutition are directly interfered with by the tumour, consequently the food does not pass far enough into the gullet to allow the action of the circular fibres to come into play, and hence the greater tendency of food to regurgitate into the mouth or larynx, when the tumour is situated high up than when it occupies a lower part.
Another circumstance of importance is the clanger in such
cases to interference with respiration, either as a consequence of pressure of the growth leading to a diminution in the lumen of the air-passage, or by invasion of the larynx by the new formation. In this case the disease did not actually invade the air-passages, but, from its bulk within the gullet, the posterior wall of the larynx was pressed forwards, and at the
same time the circulation in the mucous membrane was so
impeded as to produce a sudden oedema. As a result of these combined influences, respiration was impeded and tracheotomy required for the relief of the patient.
The result of both operations was quite satisfactory; but, in consequence of the extensive nature of the disease, a radical operation could not be thought of.

