<|ttrrent <gCoj>ii(ss.

WAR SERVICES, PENSIONS, AND ALLOWANCES.
The following article is taken from The Lancet (September 22nd, 1917), and will be found to
contain a vast amount of useful information
about pensions, grants, and allowances to medical men employed on war service :?
War Service and the Medical Men : Pensioners, Grants, and Allowances.
We have put together in concise form the various means through which the medical man, who has entered either the Navy or Army, is compensated for invalidism or loss of professional income, while the case of his death on service is considered in respect of pensions to widows and children. The new Royal Warrant is placed first, as it is not merely the most important organisation, but is part of the ordinary terms of agreement between employer and employed. Various agencies follow, applicable in greater or lesser degree in different circumstances, and the source of further information if required is given in each case. The War Emergency Fund of the Royal Medical Benevolent Fund is placed last but one, as its intention is avowedly to supplement and fill in the gaps of the other agencies ; the Medical Patriotic Fund of the British Medical Association last of all, as the fund is only to be instituted if others fail to co-operate or amalgamate.
Ministry of Pensions : the Royal Warrant
(July 1917). Object.?The draft Warrant issued by the Minister of Pensions in July deals with the retired pay of disabled officers (naval or military) and with the pensions of the families and relatives of deceased officers, with effect from April 1st, 1917, and the option of fuither retrospective effect if more favourable to the officer than his present retired pay. The actual schedules are given as
follows:?
(1) Retired pay to Disabled Officers.
Retired pay on account op disablement.

Degree of

Percentage degree of

disablement. disablement,

Officers not holding permanent commissions in Regular Forces.

Officers holding permanent commissions in Regular Forces.

Major-
General.

BrigadierGeneral.

Colonel.

LieutenantColonel.

Major.

Captain, Lieutenant, or
Second Lieu-
tenant.

All ranks.

Per cent.

?

100

350

80

280

70

245

60

210

50

175

40

140

30

105

20

70

? ?. 325 0 2S0 0 927 10 195 0 162 10 130 0
97 10 65 0

? s. 275 0 220 0 192 10 165 0 137 10 110 0
82 10 55 0

? 250 200 175 150 125 100
75' 50

? s, 225 0 180 0 157 10 135 0 112 10
93 0 67 10 45 0

? s. 175 0 140 0 122 10 105 0
87 10 70 0 52 10 35 0

?
100^
80
70 Fn addition to re-
60 tired p\y under Royal Warrant
51 of Dec. 1st, 1914.
40
30
20

Jan., 1918.]

WAR FUNDS FOR THE BENEFIT OF MEDICAL MEN.

23

Application.?The central office of the Council is at

(2) Pensions, Gratuities, and Allowances to Officers' Widows13-14, Princes Gate, S. W. 7 (Tel. Kensington 6394/5).

and Children.

Chairman : Major Leonard Darwin. Chairman of exe-

cutive : Dr. S. West. Honorary secretaries : Theo. G,

Widow's

Widow's

Chambers, Alex
Children's

Goddard. Secretary : Miss

Percy

Rank.

pensions. gratuity. allowances.Tailor. Interviews by appointment only. There are

eight members of the medic;vl profession on the Council

?namely, Sir Thomas Barlow, Lady Barrett, Sir Francis

(1)

(2) (3)

(4)

(5) (6)Champneys, Sir Watson Cheyne, Dr. G. Newton Pitt,

Field Marshall

?800 ?600 ?3,500 ?300 ?25Mrs. Scharlieb, Sir Frederick Taylor, Dr. S, West.

General

600 450

3,000 ?0 25

Lieutenant-General

500 375

2,003 30 25

Officers' Families Fund.

Major-General Brigadier-General

400 300 300 225

1,100 900

30 30

25 25

Object.?To assist the wives and other dependent rela-

?Colonel

200 150

600 ?24 20tives of officers in the Navy and Army (including

?(-Lieutenant-Colonel

180 135

450 24 20Service Battalions, the Territorial Forces, Indian Army,

Major

140 105

300 24 20and Colonial Forces) who find themselves in financial

Captain
Lieutenant

100

75

100

75

250 140

24 24

2200embarrassment or other trouble owing to direct or indirect

Second-Lieutenant

100

75

100 24 20expenses resulting from the war.

Benefits.?Assistance is provided in the form of (1)

* Colonel means an officer who has been employed

in the

money ; (2) medical assistance, with the co-operation of rankdoctors, nurses, and materqity homes (Florence Night-

of Colonel, f Including a Colonel not employed as above.

ingale Hospital, Lisson Grove) ; (3) education, alreadv

iV.S.?Whether pension is grante.l or (3), and whether the gratuity (4)

to is

the widow on scale
added, depends on

(2g) iven to 475 girls and boys (honorary theH. Parry); (4) clothing depot for men

secretary, Mr. E. at 2, Albert Gate,

particular circumstances attending the officer's death same consideration applies to the additional children's

alalnodwantcheeS.

W.

5

;

for

women

and

children

at

29,

Berkeley

Square,

(6). Allowances are continued up to the age of 18 in the case ofW. 1, managed by Lady Wilson ; (5) business advice

sons (with extension for purposes of education or apprenticeship)(chairman, Lord Justice Warrington ; 2,000

and to the age of 21 in the case of daughters.

interviews have been given) ; (6) employment.

personal During

Conditions. -Retired pay at temporary rates

is

the two years 1914-16 in all 9,506 grants have been made, givenamounting to nearly ?200,000, while 476 widows and 172

until disablement has reached its final condition andmothers have been assisted.

a permanent pension then awarded cannot be subsequently altered to the officer's disadvantage. Durin"-

Application. ?'The central office

of the

Fund is at

special treatment pay at the highest
be received. In the

degree

of disable"sLeacnrsetdaorwy,neCoHuonutsees,s

Berkeley
Roberts.

Square, W. 1. Honorary Secretary, Miss H. M.

ment may the officer

requiring

the

constanctasaettoefndtaotnacle doifsaabsleecmoenndtKelly.

Interviews 11-1 (except Thursday and Saturday),

pei son may receive

an

additional

allowance

of ?78

or by appointment.
a

N-

year. When the degree of disablement is less than

Aoxiliarit R.A.M.C. Funds.

20 per cent, a gratuity not exceeding ?500 mayJ be gianted in lieu of retired pay.

Object.?(a) Officers' Benevolent Branch : To assist the

orphans of commissioned officers of the three auxiliary

Military Service (Civil Liabilities) Committee.

branches of the R.A.M.C.?viz., the Special Reserve, the Territorial Force, and the New Armies?serving during

Object.?To grant pecuniary or unmarried, serving with

assistance to men, married H. M. Forces who

the

present

war.

(6) Relief Branch :

To assist the widows

unable

by

reason

of undertaking

military

are and orphans of the rank and
service to A similar Fund has existed

file of the same branches. since 1820 in the regular

meet their financial obligations.

R.A.M.C.

Benefits.? Applicants must not must be ordinarily resident in

hold a commission and
the United Kingdom

Benefits (of the Benevolent Branch).?Relief is given respect of each orphan up to a maximum of ?40 in a

in

Assistance is granted

in

respect

of rent,

interest

and

and to the age of 21 ^ears (boys) or

year, 18 years (girls). A

repayment of loans, instalments under agreements of
purchase, rates and taxes, insurance premiums school

female

orphan has a claim if over 50 years
if unfit. Loss of both

and

unmarried,

fees, but is not available for ordinary debts.

or at any age

parents constitutes a

superior claim for relief, and priority is given to the

Amount.?Not to exceed ?104 per annum (= ?2 a relatives of effieers killed in action, or who died of wounds

week) paid quarterly.

or disease caused by active service. Donations are given,

Conditions.?The assistance may not be assigned and not annuities.

is liable to revision or withdrawal at ceases on discharge from the Forces.

any In

time It
c ise' the

Application.?The office of the benevolent branch is at
124, Victoria Street, S. W. 1 (Tel. Vict, 2722). President,

grantee is reported dead or missing the assistance may Sir A. Keogh. Chairman, Major Ewen Maclean. Secre-

be continued for 26 weeks to his widow or dependents tary, Lientenant-Colonel E. M. Wilson. Application

Application.?Commissioners have been annointed

should be made on or before July 1st in any year, the

45 districts in England 3 in wa|es, a,1(l

distribution taking place annually in October.

js'Tseoiod A list of addresses can be inspected at any post-office'

Society for Relief of Widows and Orphans of

Application should be made to the Commissioner for the

Medical Men.

district in which the applicant or his familv reside ?

a form obtainable at the post-office.

'

Object.?To provide for the necessitous widows and

Professional Classes War Relief Council (Inc)

orphans of its members. Conditions of membership.?Membership is open to

Object.- To assist the families of professional men

any
registered medical practitioner resident at the time of

whose circumstances ha?>e been adversely aflWprl

his election within a 20-mile radius of Charing Cross

war. Those serving with H. M. Forces (without hold The annual subscription is ?2 2s. Relief is granted in

ing commissions) are advised to confer first win,

respect of life members and those of three years' stand-

Civil Liabilities Committee.

ing.

Benefits.?When granted these have been of a s- h

Benefits.?A widow with an assured income of less than

ren'ort stantial character. Up to the issue of the last

?100 a year receives ?50 annually, plus ?43 a year for

assistance had been granted to the extent of Pin nm for the education of 631 children, 256 babies had been

each orphan up to 16 years of age. The Copeland and Brickwell Funds permit of further grants in special cases.

born in the maternity home, and 103 candidates helnpd In the year 1916 ?4.223 odd was distributed, and on the

with their training at a cost of ?1,300,

24

THE INDIAN MEDICAL GAZETTE.

[Jan., 1918.

last day of the year 48 widows and 9 orphans were in receipt of grants.
Application.?Secretary, 11, Chandos Street, Cavendish Square, Wi 1.
War -Emergency Fund of the Royal Medical
Benevolent Fund.
Object.?A special department of the Royal Medical
Benevolent Fund to afford assistance to members of the
medical profession who find themselves in temporary difficulties, consequent on having joined the Army
Medical Service. Benefits.?Grants on a liberal scale will be made in
respect of rent, insurance, taxes, family maintenance and education, in so far as the needs are not met by any other existing fund if the necessary funds are forthcoming.
Application.?The office of the Fund is at 11, Chandos Street, Cavendish Square, W. 1, President, Dr. S. West. Honorary treasurer, Colonel Charters Symonds.
Medical Patriotic EJjjnd op the B.M.A. At the last Annual Representative Meeting of the
British Medical Association a scheme for loan fund for
the protection and assistance of those who went to the war and on coming home found themselves in temporary difficulties was brought in by a sub-committee appointed for the purpose. A resolution as follows was passed :?
" This meeting approves the principle of the Medical Patriotic Fund (Loan Fund) Scheme, and instructs the Council to consider and, if approved, to launch the scheme
on the cessation of hostilities or earlier if the need arise
unless in the meantime amalgamation or co-operation of existing funds shall render the establishment of an independent fund unnecessary or undesirable.
THE INTERNATIONAL HEALTH BOARD.
The Kockefeller Foundation.
It is difficult not to be enthusiastic when one
reads of the splendid work done by the Inter-
national Health Board in many countries in the
world. In their third annual report of the calendar year 1916,* Dr. Wicklefife Kose submits his report as Director-General of this great
scheme.
During the year no less than 503,349 dollars, or over one and-a-half million (1,510,047) rupees were spent on the work of this Board, of which more than half was spent on the relief and control of hookworm disease.
Systematic efforts towards control have now been established in eight Southern States and fifteen foreign countries, between 36? of N. latitude and 30? South, i.e., the tropical and sub-tropical belt, which is the habitat of the hookworm. In addition to this, the Board sent out two Malaria Commissions, and two to S. America on yellow fever.
The staff of the Board reports that everywhere it has met with cordial reception and with general co-operation on the part of governments and the medical profession.
The active measures for the control and
prevention of hookworm are as noteworthy as they are widespread in the Southern States, as Well as in Brazil, Nicaragua, Panama, British and
, Broadway, New York, U.S.A.

Dutch Guiana and in West Indian Islands such as

St. Vincent and Trinidad.

Many important facts have thus been elicited,

e.g., the relation between geological structure

and hookworm infection, e.g., in Barbados one

portion, composed of porous coral limestone

which dries quickly, is unfavourable to the growth

of the young hookworm, whereas in another

portion of the island, a picturesque highland

district

known

locally

as

"
Scotland,"

the infection

is very heavy, it being estimated that 25,000
persons suffer from it in an area of less than

25 square miles. ?

Among other points elicited is that of racial immunity, e.g., the Negro-creoles of British Honduras are " clinically " immune, but the other

inhabitants?Indians and half-castes (Mestizos) are heavily infected.

Everywhere the dangers of soil pollution is

seen, due to primitive and inefficient sanitary conveniences,and the planters in British Honduras

have come to realise this fact. Special difficul-

ties arise in places where, like China, human

excrement is largely used as a fertilizer.

The plan of work is first to develop interest in the work by the " dispensary plan," and when this has been in working order to start the "intensive plan," i.e., to treat everybody and

to try to eradicate the infection permanently.

It is satisfactory to learn

that

" a

measurable

reduction in infection has been secured by the

dispensary method."

The following figures are significant:?
In these thirty-five counties, 63,882 persons were examined by the dispensary plan. Of these, 37'5 per
cent were found to be infected with hookworm disease.

At the beginning of the intensive work in the same aieas, usually from three to five years after the completion of the dispensary work, 34,727 persons were
examined. The infection was found to be 26'5 per cent.

Thus, in spite of the opportunities offered over a period of years for cases of new infection or re-infection to arise, it will be seen that the infection recorded in
intensive work was 11 0 per cent, lower than that recorded
in dispensary work, indicating that as a result of the dispensary work the number of persons infected with the disease was reduced approximately one-third The method of comparison may be open to error ; the num-
ber of persons examined and the per cent of decrease
are, however, sufficiently large to be significant A more limited comparison, including only persons who were examined by both methods, indicates that the estimate of reduction is conservative. Practising physicians and field directors state, moreover, that they
now encounter but few of the severe cases of infection

which were so frequently seen in 1910 and 1911. Sufficient time has not yet elapsed since the adoption
of the intensive method to warrant a tabulation of the

percentage of reduction in infection which it has secured. It can reasonably be estimated, however, that this percentage is greater than that secured by the dispensary method. The intensive type of work, like the dispensary, reduces infection through curative measures.

The intensive method, of course, involves the installation, use, and maintenance of adequate
latrines, but it produces more permanent
results.

Jan., 1918.]

TREATMENT OF HOOKWORM INFECTIONS.

25

begun during the month of April, many obstacles,

The

report

then

goes

on

to

give

accounts of tmhoest of them of a religious and the work finally had to

nature, were encountered, be abandoned before being

anti-hookworm work done in many countries?bcuotmpleted. Examination and treatment by the dis-

as India is not mentioned (India's efforts thougpehnsary method was carried out in the central office at

guided by the Board's experiences are under tJhVelatale and in the village of Katugastota.

control of the Scientific Bureau in India),

it

willUp to brought to

December a close on

31,
ten

1916,
estates

operations had been and in the villages of

be perhaps best to give an apcount of the InternaA-lawatagoda and Wilane, while work was in progress

tional Board's work in 1916?in Ceylon.

on five other estates and in four other villages, as well

During

1916

the

International

Health Board

as in four schools and one college. began

active participation in measures for the relief and

Treatment,

control of hookworm disease in Ceylon. this colony is conducted as a branch of the

The work in Further Government

experiments

as to

the

value, of oil of

cheno-

Medical Department, under the supervision of

Dr.

G.

Jp.otlium in
conducted

the treatment of hookworm
during the year. The efficacy

disease of this

were
drug

.Rutherford, Principal Civil Medical Officer. Control'
vested in a local Ankylostomiasis Committee,

wisas tested under

varying

conditions

of

administration,

of

the

Colonial

Secretary,

the

Principal

composeidn doses of different sizes, and in certain instances studies Civil Medicawlere made of its value in comparison with thymol and

Officer, members Associations, and

of the Estate Agents' prominent medical men

ofantdhePlcaonltoenrysb.'eta-naphthol.

Practically all reports agree that oil of

Of

this Committee

the

Colonial

Secretary

is

Chairman.

chenopodium Ascaris, and

is the most that it is

effective remedy
more active than

for expelling thymol in the

beEefnfomrtasdetofoerradaincautmebetrheofdisease from Ceylon havtereatment of infection with Oxyuris and Trichocephalus.

visit

of tlie

years. Director-General of

At the time of thAe s to its value in the treatment of the International

hookworm

infection,

Health disease

Board under

in 1914, control

definite

plans

for

bringing

however, the reports received have thceharacter?the result, perhapsj of

been conflicting in differences in the

provided

for

the

work

were formulated. Thes&e to be conducted entirely by

plansstrength
local

and

potency of the drug, in the laboratory
in the methods of administration

agencies, the expense to be shared equally by thetechnique employed, or

,

Government' and the planters. Because of conditions Alarming symptoms, and sometimes death, have been

growing out of the war, however, this project had toreported in the Southern States, the West Indian

be abandoned soon after it was begun.

colonies, Panama, Nicaragua, Ceylou, and Egypt follow-

Later, on May 26, 1915, during the visit of theing the administration of the drug in accordance with

International Health Board's Director for the Eastaccepted methods of treatment, and in nearly every

arrangements were made for resuming measures forinstance in less than the maximum dose. Extreme

the control of the disease with the co-operation of ancaution in the use of the drug is therefore indicated

officer of the Board. Active work was begun onuntil its proper method of preparation has been learne'd,

January 12, 1916. At first the staff" consisted of aits chemical composition and stability standardized, and

Director, an Assistant Medical Director, six apothe a safe dosage and method of administration established,

caries, and one caretaker, with all expenses exclusiveThe fact that the drug is a powerful poison, often

of the salary and personal allowance of the Director uncertain in action under conditions at present attending

borne equally by the government and the planters

'its preparation and administration, should lead all

Later, in accordance with a new arrangement'made medical officers to be extremely discriminating in its

by Dr. H. H. Howard, the Board's Director for the use.

West Indies, who had .been delegated to assist in In administering the drug in Nicaragua, Dr. Molloy

organizing the work in Ceylon, the staff was enlarged reports that no arbiti-ary dosage has been followed. The

to include a Director, an Assistant Medical Director dose recommended by Dr. Schiiffner, 1-00 gram to 1'20

three junior field Directors (in training), four micro' grams as the maximum (15 to 18 minims), was followed

scopists, twelve nurses, two clerical assistants, and one for a while, but this was found to be insufficient under

caretaker. Six of the nurses speak Tamil and English ordinary conditions. The dose was finally increased to a

and four Sinhalese and English, while two are Moors maximum of 2*00 grams (30 minims). In none but very

engaged to handle the Moorish population in the exceptional cases was a dose of 3*01) grams (recommended

villages. This division represents roughly the pro- by some physicians in the Far East) prescribed in a

portion of these element! of population. Under the dispensary. The maximum dose which can be safely

new arrangement, the cost of the work is divided prescribed in dispensaries operating in Central America,

between the Government and the Board From O.-tnl^r where the average weight is about 120 pounds, is believed

18 until directed

the end of the year, the
by Dr. W. Perrin Norris,

work in Ceylon was Associate Director

by Dr. Molloy to be 2 00 grams. As a rule the dose is proportioned

according to age, as

for the East, with Dr John E. charge of operations in the field.

Snodgrass

in

direct

follows : Two drops for each year of age to the age of 24, 48 drops being considered the maximum. This

The Matale district, located in the central part of the amount of the ordinary oil of chenopodium, dropped from

Island
capital,

about seventy five miles was chosen for initial

from

Colombo,

the

a dropping bottle, weighs approximately This dose is always given in two or three

2'00 grams.
equal parts,

operations.
this area is seven by ten miles in extent.

Rouehlv Included with an hourly, or two-hourly, interval between portions

withm its boundar.es are twenty-f0nr rubber and (two hours if given in two equal parts, or one hour if

tea estates and from forty to fifty towns, and hamlets. Ihe estate population

villages,

given in three equal parts). The mode of administration followed is essentially as

numbers about 8,000 and averages one person to the acre : the village follows:

All solid food is prohibited after the midday

population is approximately 18,000. The district "is meal the day before administering the drug. At 4 p, h.

mountainous, and large portions of it can be reached of this day, the patient is given a cleansing purge of

only on foot; on one estate, certain of the coolie lines Epsom salts. By giving this preliminary purge at

are about five miles apart and difficult of access as 4 o'clock, the necessity of having to get up during the

the estate extends over a mountain range

night is avoided, since the purgative will have acted, as

Both the intensive and dispensary plans have been a rule, before bed-time.

followed in the work to date. On the estates, where it

At 6 o'clock the following morning, before any food is

is possible to exercise a considerable decree of control eaten, the first portion of sugar containing the chenopo-

over the coolies while they are being examined and dium is taken, followed by the remainder at hourly or

treated, and in the villages, the operations have been of two-hourly intervals. Two hours after the last of the

the intensive type. In two of the villages, however chenopodiutu, a good dose of Epsom salts (usually a little

Alawatagoda and Wilane, in which operations were

26

THE INDIAN MEDICAL GAZETTE.

[Jan., 191&

more than an ounce for adults) is taken to expel the worms. This is repeated, if necessary, in two hours.
During the last quarter of the year, a series of experiments was begun in Nicaragua to determine the efficacy of chenopodium treatment under given conditions and in given doses. These experiments are still under way, and will be continued until a large number of cases have
been treated.
Chenopodium oil, alone, is being used as the basis of treatment. Chenopodium oil mixed with a sufficient amount of oil of eucalyptus to disguise its unpleasant taste and odour (three parts chenopodium and one part eucalyptus) and chenopodium in capsules, are also being used. These treatments are being given to the recruits of the Nicaraguan army, are personally administered by a technical assistant, and all examinations are made with the use of the centrifuge.
In Salvador, oil of chenopodium, given usually in capsules, and thymol with equal parts of sugar of milk, also administered in capsules, are the drugs which have been used. In some instances both oil of chenopodium and thymol have been given to the same patients. When chenopodium is taken the preliminary purge is omitted, a dose of Epsom salts being given in the majority of cases following the last dose of chenopodium. No reexaminations are made in less than one week following the last treatment; in most cases, a longer period is allowed. The centrifuge is used, two slides being examined before and two after centrifuging.
In this country, experiments were conducted as to the relative efficiency of three methods of treatment?that is, oil of chenopodium alone, thymol alone, and one dose of oil of chenopodium followed by thymol for the second and for all subsequent treatments. These experiments, however, have not progressed sufficiently to draw positive conclusions. From the investigations so far conducted it Would appear that with fifteen drops of oil of chenopodium administered every one or two hours for three doses, followed by castor oil, a larger number
of persons are cured with two treatments than when
thymol is administered In three laboratories operating in Panama, thymol is
used ; in one, chenopodium. Each drug is reported as having its advantages. At the close of the third quarter, 1916, a change to the exclusive use of chenopodium was being considered, but during the last quarter the results obtained by the laboratory using chenopodium were unsatisfactory. The cause may have been faulty technique on the part of the newmicroscopists employed in that laboratory, the drug may have been poor in quality, or there may have been some other cause not yet determined.
In administering the drug in Guatemala,a mathematical table of dosage is not adhered to. The minimum dose
is 0*65 c c. ; the maximum 3'00 c.c To a child below
ten years, either the minimum dose is given or the dose is increased according to the physical condition of (he child ; to an average adult, 2 c c. is given ; and to a strong, vigorous male, the maximum dose. At each treatment the dose is divided into three portions, with one hour intervals. Two hours following the last dose, a purge of sodium sulphate is administered.
During the early months of the work in Ceylon, oil of chenopodium was administered in maximum doses of eight minims, repeated in two hours. Castor oil was the only purgative used at this time. Subsequently,
the dose was increased to ten and then to twelve
minims, until, upon the recommendation of the Malaya Board and of Colonel W. Perrin Norris, Associate Director for the East, it was increased to a maximum of sixteen minims, repeated hourly for three doses. Towards the end of the year, magnesium sulphate was used almost to the exclusion of castor oil as a purgative. With the 8-minim doses, it was rare that more than 20 to 30 per cent, of cures were secured after two treatments. As the size of the dose was increased
better results were obtained, until, among one group

of patients, there were 65-7 per cent, of cures after two
treatments
At the present time, the dispensers in Ceylon are given the following instructions concerning the administration of chenopodium :
1. Oil of chenopodium may be administered in accordance with the following table :

Age.

Dose of Chenopodium

1 to 2 years ...

3 minims hourly for three doses

3 to 5 years ... 4 to 5 minims hourly for three doses

6 to 10 years ... 6 to 9 minims hourly for three doses

11 to 16 years ... 10 to 13 minims hourly for three doses

17 to 50 years ... 14 to 16 minims hourly for three doses

Above 50

... 12 to 14 minims hourly for three doses

In any instance where it is impossible or impracticable to give three doses for a treatment, the maximum dose may be divided into two equal parts, and the second portion be administered at an interval of one
or two hours after the first. 2. The drug may be administered on sugar, in milk,
or in gelatin capsules or globules. 3. On the evening before the treatment is to be given*
a dose of Epsom salts is administered in accordance with the following table :

Age.

1 to 5 years

...

6 to 10 years

...

11 to 15 years

...

16 to 20 years

...

21 and above

...

Dose of Epsom salts solution.
... 4 drams of the solution ... 8 drams of the solution ... 12 drams of the solution
... 16 drams of the solution ... 24 drams of the solution

Five pounds of Epsom salts dissolved in five gallons
of hot water makes the above solution.
In case this solution is objectionable to certain persons, castor oil may be given as the purgative, in which case give as follows :

Age.

Dose of castor oil.

1 to 3 years

...

...

...

2 drams

4 to 8 years

...

..

... 3 to 5 drams

9 to 16 years

...

...

... 6 to 10 drams

Above 16 years

???

... 8 to 16 drams

One and one half ounces is usually the maximum dose that should be given to a female.
4. At, say, 6 o'clock the following morning give the first dose of chenopodium and repeat this dose at 7 and 8 o'clock ; at 10 o'clock give a purgative similar in size to, or if the bowels moved thoroughly, smaller than, the one given on the previous evening.
5. Only a light meal should be eaten the evening before treatment, and no food and very little water should be taken on the morning of treatment, until after the bowels have moved well following the second
purgative. 6 No alcohol in any form, or acids, should be taken
for a period of twelve hours before and after taking oil of chenopodium, as these substances assist in the absorption of the drug into the system, and this is very undesirable. Symptoms of poisoning may follow if this precaution is disregarded.
7. Dispensers on estates should keep their cases under direct observation until after the last dose of the purgative has been given and has acted. Dispensers in the villages should arrange to be notified in case any of their cases become ill after treatment, or if the purgative does not move the bowels thoroughly, in which case it should be repeated.
8. No treatment should be given until a medical officer has examined the person. The dispenser must not treat persons who have developed the following conditions after previous treatment, until after reexamination by a medical officer :
(a) Very old or emaciated persons, who are made weak by, or after, treatment;
(b) Persons suffering from acuto diseases, such as malaria, dysentery, rheumatism, etc. ;

Jan., 1918.]

INSECT-BORNE DISEASES.

27

(c) Children under two years of age, who become ill after treatment;
(d) Pregnant women, who should not be treated in
any instance. 9. No re-examination of the excrement should be
made until one week has elapsed after the second treatment; such examination should be made one week after each succeeding treatment. Treatments should be repeated every ten days until the case is cured. In case only two doses are given for a treatment, it may be repeated at the end of eight days. The excre-
ment should not be re-examined in less than one week after treatment, for the reason that the drug causes
the female worm to stop laying eggs for a number of days, and if examination is made in less than one week, the specimen may be negative when in reality the worms have not all been expelled.
FILARIAL PERIODICITY.
THE following are the conclusions arrived at by Dr. Warrington Yorke and Dr. B. Blacklock in an article published in the Annals of Tropical Medicine (Vol. XI, No. 2, August, 1917) :?
1. Obstruction to the passage of Microfilaria bancrofti through the cutaneous vessels occurs at all times of the day and night, but is at a minimum at the end of the period of bodily activity.
2. Although this obstruction aids in the piling up of the larvre in the cutaneous vessels, it is in no way responsible for the nocturnal periodicity.
3. The nocturnal periodicity is primarily dependent upon periodic variations in the arterial supply of larva?
to the cutaneous vessels.
4. By reversing the hours of sleep and activity, cutaneous immigration becomes diurnal instead of nocturnal. The change, however, takes place gradually;

after the periods of sleep and activity had been reversed for four days the time of maximum concentration of the Iarvse in the cutaneous vessels had only been set back six hours (from midnight to 6 a.m.) ; when reversal of the hours of sleep and activity had lasted for eleven days the time of maximum cutaneous concentration had been changed from midnight to midday.
5. The number of microfilarias, as judged from the maximum concentration in the cutaneous blood, remained at practically a constant level during the period of observation (21st December, 1916?10th February, 1917).
6. The number of microfilariee present in 100 cubic centimetres of urine varied greatly at different times during a 24-hour period. These variations, which were irregular and gave no indication of either a nocturnal or diurnal periodicity, are to be explained on the assumption that the majority of the microfilariee escaped into the urine with the blood. Graphs depicting the number of larvee per cubic centimetre of urinary blood reveal the existence of a regular periodicity corresponding to that of the larvee in the cutaneous blood, with the difference that the time of maximum concentration was several hours later.
7. The number of microfilariee in the renal and
vesical vessels exhibits a nocturnal periodicity analo-
gous to that in the cutaneous vessels.
INSECT-BORNE DISEASES.
An admirable article summarising our knowledge of insect-borne disease by Mr. M. E. MacGrregor, of the Wellcome Bureau of Scientific Research, appeared in the Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene (September 3 5th, 1917). We herewith reproduce the exoellent tables given
in that article :?

Ty ft

I

The moke important Insect-borne Diseases oe Unknown Okigxn. Names between square brackets=certfaoillnowveedctboyr?s;= npaosmseisblewivtehcotourts.square brackets=probable

vectors;

names

Organism.

Host.

Disease.

Vector,

? Salivary toxin '! Salivary toxin ?

Man ...

... Dengue (breakbone fever) .. [Sandflies (Plilebotomus), Mosquitoes C. fatig?ns ; S. Jasciata].

Three-day fever, sj/ns. "Dog disease," Sandfly fever, Plilebotomus fever.

[Sandflies (Plilebotomus) C. faiigans; S. fasciala].

Mosquitoes.

Yellow fever

[Mosquitoes (Stegomyia fasciala)].

Trench fever

Lice ?

Tick paralysis (American) ... j [Ticks (Dermaeenior renusltts)].
Tick paralysis (Australian).. [Ticks (Ixodes ricinus)].
Rocky Mountain spotted [Ticks (Dermaeenior venustus)].
fever.

Japanese river fever (shima [Mites (Larval

mushi).

mushi."

trombidiida-)] " al<a

Acute anterior poliomyelitis ? Many insects have been claimed as rectors, notably Slomoxys calcilrans t

Pellagra

? Gnats of the genus Simulium have been claimed ?

Typhus fevor

[Lice].

?28

I'HE INDIAN MEDICAL GAZETTE.

[Jan., 1918.

II. The more important Insect-borne Diseases of Bacterial Origin. N.B.?Names between square brackets=certain vectors ; names without square brackets= probable vectors ; names followed
by ? = possible vectors. The word " flies" includes in the main : Musca domestica, Fannin sps., Galliphora sps., Lucilia sps., and Sarcophaga sps.

Organism.

Hosf.

Disease.

Vector.

Bacillus antliracis

if

dysenteric^ ...

? leprce ,, paratypliosus A
B

,,

tuberculosis...

,,

typhosus

Bartonia bacilli/ormis x-bodies

Spirillum cholera;

...

Micrococcus melilensis

Diplococcus intracellularis

,,

pemphigi contaqiosi

Man and animals
and rats and animals
,, and goats

Anthrax
Bacillary dysentery
Leprosy
Paratyphoid fever
Plague Tuberculosis Typhoid fever Verruga Cholera
Undulant fever ; syns. Malta fever, Mediterranean fever, llemittent fever.
Cerebrospinal fever Tropical impetigo

[Flies], Tabanidcb? Beetles? [Flies] (Musca domestica, Galliphora
sps., Lucilia sps.) Flies? Fleas? Bed bugs ? Skin mites?
Mosquitoes ? [Flies]. [Flies]. [Flies]. Flies], cockroaches, fleas ? Bed-bugs ? [Flies]. [Phlebotomus verrucum]. [Flies], cockroaches, ants. Although
the main channel of infection is the
consumption of infected food and
water.
[Flies]. Although the main channel of infection is the consumption of goat's milk.
Flies ?
[Lice].

III. The more important Insect-borne Diseases op Protozoal Origin. iVM?.?Names between square brackets=certain vectors; names without square brackets = probable vectors ; names followed
by ? = possible vectors. t The word " flies" includes in the main -?Musca domestica, Fannia sps., Calliphora sps., Lucilia sps., and Sarcophaga sp?.

Organism.

Host.

Disease.

Vector.

E. histolitica

Lamblia intestinalis

Plasmod. Malaria

,,

vival

,,

falciparum

Leishmania tropica ,, donovani (" L. P. bodies ") ,, sp. incerta

? infantum

Trypanosoma gambiense

?

rhodescence

,,

brucei ...

,,

lewisi

lf

evansi ...

Schistotry panum

Babesia bigeminum ...

,,

ovis

n

canis

,,

caballi

Nutfallia equi (? Chamydozoa)

Man
Children Man ... Cattle and horses Rats ... Horses, mules, and
camels. IVlan Cattle Sheep Dogs Horses and mules Man ...

Am. dysentery Flagellate Quartan Benign tertian ... Malignant tertian
Oriental sore K. azar
Espundia
Leishmaniasis
Sleeping sickness
Fly sickness (Nagana) Rat trypanosomiasis Sumra
Chaga's disease Red water fever Piroplasmosis Malignant jaundice Piroplasmosis Ophthalmia egyptica

[Flies].

[Flies].

(Anophelines).

(

)

(

)

Flies ? fleas ? phlebotomus ? hippobosca ?

Bed-bugs! fleas? triatoma?

? A blood sucking insect?

Fleas ?

(Tsetse flies) (G. palpalis).
G. Morsitans.

? Louse ? fleas ? Tabanida; (horse flies).

Triatoma. Ticks. Ticks. Ticks. Ticks. Flies.

Organism.

Dipylidium caninum

Ova of certain helminths

Filaria loa

???

Microfilaria bancrofti

Fxiiylmaernioaliempmiistsd^iminuta

IV. The most important Diseases op Helminthic Origin.
Names in square brackets=certain vectors.

Host.

Disease.

Vector.

Man and dogs
Man ...
Dogs ... Rats and occasion-
ally man.

Tamiasis (tapeworm) Helminthiasis
Calabar swellings Elephantiasis Dog filariasis Ticniasis

[Doglouse]. Dog and human flea. [Flies]. [Horse flies]. [Mosquitoes]. Mosquitoes.
Fleas.

Jan., 1918.]

PREGNANCY AND CHOLERA.

29

v. The more important Insect-borne Diseases of Spirochetal Origin.
IV rt ?N'n.mfl'j between square brackets=certain vectobrsy ?; =npaomsesisblweitvehcotuotrs.square brackets=probable vectors ; narae9 followed The word "flies" includes in the main :?Musca domestica, Fttnnia sps., Oalliphora sps., Lucilia sps., and Sarcophaga sps.

Organism.

Host.

Disease.

Vector.

Spirochci'ta carteri duttoni
gallinarum novyi pertenuis .. recurrmtis berbera

Man
Fowls Man

Indian relapsing.fever African relapsing fever (Tick
fever.) Spirochetosis American relapsing fever ... Yaws (Frambcesia) European relapsing fever ... North African relapsing
fever.

[Lice]. [Ticks (0. moubata,
[Argas persicus]. [Lice].
Flies?
[Lice]. Bed-bugs? [Lice].

0. savigny)].

The more important Diseases directly attributable to insects and Acarina. N.B.?Name between square brackets = certain vector.

The larvaj of Fannia canicularis

it

,,

Piophila casei

.1

,,

Eristalis tenax

? ,, Muscina stabulans

,,

,,

Sarcophaga sps.

,,

,,

Lucilia sps.

,,

?>

Calliphora sps.

,, ,, Chrysomyia macel-

laria (the screw

worm.)

i. ,, Cordylobia anthropo-

phaga (the Tumbu

fly.) Dermatobia hominis

,,

,,

99

...

9,9, 9,9, Hppoderma bovis,

&c.

CEstrus oris

,, Gaslrophilus kc.
Trombidiidce vest mites.)
Pedicidoides ventricosus
Tyroglyphus siro

equi, (Har

Man ...

and animals

Cattle (occasionally man.)

Sheep man.)
Horses

(rarely

Man

Intestinal myiasis Ditto

Ditto

Ditto

Intestinal, dermal and mus-

cular myiasis. Ditto

ditto

Ditto

ditto

Nasal, auricular, and dermal

myiasis.

Dermal myiasis ...

Ditto Ditto Ditto
Nasal myiasis

(Creeping
disease in man.)

Gastric myiasis ...

Severe cutaneous irritation

Dermatitis

,,

(the

so-called

" vanillism").

[Mosquito (Janlhinosoma

Other Tyroglyphidcv ...

Tyroglyphus longior castellam

Sarcoptes scabiei

Pediculus capitis

,,

hunianus

Phthirius pubis

Dermatophilius penetrans (Chig- | ,, gers.)

and animals and animals

,,

(Grocers' itch) ...

Copra itch

" Itch " or "scabies"

Pediculosis of the head

Ditto

body

Ditto

axillary

and pubic regions.

Severe cutaneous irritation...

The more important Insect-borne Diseases of Fungus Origin.

lulzii)].

Achorion schonleinii ...

N.B.?Name between square brackets = certain vector.

j Man ...

... i Favus

...

... j [Lice (Pediculi)],

Mr. MacGrregor concludes his articles with the following remarks:?
It should be borne in mind that a large number of diseases included in the foregoing; tables are not confined to being spread by insects, and insect transmission may, in some cases, only be occasional. This fact, however, cannot afford the preclusion of such diseases from consideration, and where transmission of the indirect type is possible, it is obvious that we are unable to form any just estimate of its relative importance. Probably, nevertheless, the dissemination of pathogenic microorganisms by flies, for all that has lately been said in this connection, has not even yet been over-emphasized. It seems more than likely that Bacillus tuberculosis is spread in this manner from infective sputum to food (milk particularly) to a much greater extent than is commonly imagined, and there being no probability of

rapid acute infection, as with B. typhosus, the part played by the fly is too apt to be overlooked.
Much of our knowledge with regard to insects and disease is still indefinite, as may be seen from the tables, but to anyone not particularly conversant with the subject, what we already know with certainty, even in connection with only the more important diseases that have been considered, may be sufficient to cause some little surprise.
TREATMENT OF PREGNANCY IN CHOLERA CASES.
Dr. P. McC. Lowell, of Manila, has a practical article in The Philippine Journal of Science (Vol. XII, July, 1917) on the handling of a pregnant woman in cholera. In recent outbreaks

30

THE INDIAN MEDICAL GAZETTE.

[Jan., 1918.

in Manila, Dr. Lowell has had good results with the hypertonic salt solution with soda bicarbonate, and in 302 non-pregnant cases the mortality was only 19 per cent., whereas in the case of pregnant women in 66 cases
there were 30 deaths or 45 per cent. His
conclusions as to the best way of handling cases
of pregnancy in such serious conditions are
given as follows :?
From the facts narrated above, it is evident that the speedy terminaion of attempted abortion, or the removal of the dead foetus is not only justified but indicated. Even if the number of cases experimented upon may seem to be small, I think it is sufficiently large when considering the results obtained. The almost immediate urination following and the general change in the condition for the better after the delivery were at times nothing short of marvellous.
This method seems to be original, as I am unable to find any mention of it in the literature available, with the possible exception of Davis, who advocates the speedy termination of the labour if it should start, but says nothing about removing the dead foetus when abortion is not threatened.

The Proceedings of the Kathiawar Medical Society (for September, 1917) contain a useful article on uric acid gravel and stone by Dr. N. T. Mehta, of Junagadh, and we are glad to see, as in all places where stone is common, a preference for the crushing operation.
Sub-Assistant Surgeon E. K. Desai gives a case of " appendicitis " and quotes at full length a lot of very ordinary and harmless prescriptions, after which the patient recovered. It is far from certain that the diagnosis was correct, at least the paper as printed gives no reason to
suppose so.
Sub-Assistant Surgeon M. J. Adalfa has a useful note on two cases of eclampsia. It is satisfactory to see that the Kathiawar Medical Society continues to do useful work.

Conclusions,
1. Pregnant cholera cases have a higher mortality than non-pregnant cases, if left to their own resources.
2. The later the pregnancy the graver is the
prognosis for the mother.
3. There is some factor other than mechanical which
kills the foetus very early in the disease in the majority
of the cases. 4. Abortions occur in most of the cases, and the older
the foetus the greater is the tendency to abort. 5. Most of the pregnancies come to a fatal termina-
tion.
6. Abortion is nature's therapeutic measure in aiding the mother in her fight for life.
7. The essential factor in the treatment of pregnant cholera cases is to remove the dead foetus as soon as
possible and in the manner best suited to the mother's condition, because it shortens the periods of convalescence, preserves the strength of the mother, and reduces the mortality to about that of the non-pregnant cases.

The second issue of "Recalled to Life" (J. Bale Sons and Danielson Ld.) continues to give valuable account of recent developments in the case of the
care, re-education and return to civil life of the
disabled, and institutions for discharged soldiers and sailors are being founded. Sir Walter Lawrence gives an interesting account of orthopaedic work, at the present moment there are in use some 10,000 beds for orthopjEdic cases, and Sir
Wm. Osier described the work done and showed
how little the capabilities of the maimed are appreciated.
An excellent article on Amoebic Abscess of the
Liver by Dr. Rufino Abriol appears in The Philippine Journal of Science, May, 1917.

Ophthalmology (Seattle U. S. A., July, 1917) contained a long and useful synopsis of legislation by the State for the Blind.

