louteira.

Prophylaxis of

in India. By Lt.-

Col. P. HeHIR, I.M.S.i M.D., F.R.C.P., F.RC.S, D.P.H.,

Allahabad, 1910. 1'ioneer Press.

Lt.-Colonel HeHIR is known well .as a writer

on many medical subjects in India 5 his book on

Indian Hygiene is well known and bis Outlines

of Medical Jurisprudence for India is one of

the best on the subject. _

The subject of malaria in India and its pre-

vention has been much before us during the past

year, and the assembly of the Malaria Confer-

ence at Simla under the auspices of H. E. the

Viceroy is an augury for increased attention to

this important subject.

_

Except some excellent little manuals by Majoi

S. P. James,

we

had no complete

treatise 011 malaria if India for a long time

Past, hence we welcome Lt.-Col. Hehir's volume,

though it deals with the subject mainly from

the side of preventive medicine.

ol a!f1 ^eaccounfc! We have read this book with

with profit. It contains a very comhIp^p '6 '

of modern work on malaria

the clinical with which it is nnf- S excePt

?r.
After a

fr ew

pages devoted

to the

concerned
historv f

malaria. Our author attacks the enidpmini ?

problems
of the

and

discusses and

the

economic

importance

question

quotes the well-known

instances of successful localised anti-malaria

campaigns. He very rightly points out the

same amount of concentrated enemy and

tC capital could not bo employed all over

one and three-quarter million square miles of

Ind.a. Al we can hope for is to

"considerably reduce malaria in the more endpmin f ?

India." Some statistical tables irp tl> ?C-

of the incidence of malaria in

'regime^/'?' among pnsoners and Rogers' useful table of the

comparative monthly incidence of the different

forms of malarial fever m Indin ;Q

i

from the "Fevers in the Tropics "

P'oduced

on'to The same chapter goes

discuss t,

relation of malaria to marshes 11, /

t'an!cs? ravines, irrigation canals, irrigated Sj

^" cultivation (wet cultivation come* ^ "

'S, r'ce

stricture as the cause of an enorm 01 seve,e

ma^M^^fn,?n0U,l,l of malaria). The idle of
distribution of malaria is not ovp l
hv? o\.and the standard paper on this subject
pliers and Bentlev is made use nf
that the effect of railways js si.ai." i
a^ been to aggravate malaiia, whereas
Conference, L. Rogers claimed tin/ n ?
t apply at any rate to the railways i' ,' n
J? J*"*1'" District of Bengal, hut no one const?"' the aggregation of coolies in railway
tion must increase malaria and H.o

V
n',s^?nr 8 "?^e
?,m'a
']0t
7 ?-

borrow pits which extend f0,
thousand^'mlle?f along every railway embankment seem idea
arranged for the distribution 0f malar' 1 quitoes. There is no" excuse for
these'lor?8" pits being left in their present condition
making is just as bad and no attempt is madp" to connect the various borrow pits and so ll'
water to drain of. The formation of borrow pits lias been declared illeo-il1 lJnn ? the
Canal Zone at Panama.

Lt.-Col. Hehir next discusses vaiirmo . theories and gives a full account of
milh!'" mosquitoes making use ?f the standard
of Giles, James and Liston, and nf

i

?

,

works

,

,

\ ^ on this subject. The next chanter do

the malarial parasites and the

methoV'of examining them.

UU!S 01

Part II deals with the effect nf .

i

?

man and touches upon the climVoi , arLa 0,1

arei v! question. Good accounts

?f t,le

genesis, of relapses and reinfections

G'

n,J malaria and of malarial cachexia

posed relations of malaria to' n

i S11P~

i,?'?ei"d,se??es. The third part of the volume
gives a very full account of

xcelleht and

There is a lot of

.wort

usefuq?liil)nilLleTar'" twenty pages devoted to

312

THE INDIAN MEDICAL GAZETTE.

and this is a subject on which we still have much to learn. Other points of prophylaxis discussed are segregation of the healthy, isolation of the infected, protection against adult mosquitoes, destruction of breeding grounds, and extermination of larvae, the dangeis of cisterns, small tanks, etc., etc. Cultivation and arboriculture, larvicides, prophylaxis in towns, in villages, free issue of quinine in schools, prophylaxis in cantonments, in prisons, and among gangs of labourers are among the subjects next discussed.
An excellent chapter is devoted to prophylaxis in the individual, etc.
We commend this book to our readers. They will find the big subject of malaria well discussed and with a full acquaintance of the latest work on the subject. It is extremely useful to have the subject of malaria in India
discussed in such reasonable compass as within the 300 pages of this excellent volume. We
congratulate Lt.-Col. Hehir on its production.

[Aug., 1910.

