Demonstration Paper

SIGIR'17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

A Task-oriented Search Engine for Evidence-based Medicine

Bevan Koopman
CSIRO Brisbane, Australia bevan.koopman@csiro.au

Guido Zuccon
eensland University of Technology Brisbane, Australia g.zuccon@qut.edu.au

Jack Russell
CSIRO Brisbane, Australia jackrussell1996@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
Evidence-based medicine (EBM) is the practice of making clinical decisions based on rigorous scienti c evidence. EBM relies on e ective access to peer-reviewed literature -- a task hampered by both the exponential growth of medical literature and a lack of e cient and e ective means of searching and presenting this literature. is paper describes a search engine speci cally designed for searching medical literature for the purpose of EBM and in a clinical decision support se ing.
CCS CONCEPTS
·Information systems  Expert search;
1 PROBLEM AND TARGET USERS
While there are mature resources for searching medical literature (PubMed being a widely used example), these are primarily focused on retrieving literature for research purposes, not for clinical decision support. Research on how clinicians (doctors, nurses or other health professionals) search in a clinical decision support se ing [2] has shown that clinicians pose queries within three common clinical tasks: i) searching for diagnoses given a list of symptoms; ii) searching for relevant tests given a patient's situation; and iii) searching for the e ective treatments given a particular condition. An e ective search engine should facilitate interactions that support these three tasks. Doing so would lead to improved retrieval e ectiveness and a more economic interaction with the search engine and, ultimately, improved clinical decisions for patients.
2 TASK-BASED SEARCH ENGINE FOR EVIDENCE BASED MEDICINE
A task-oriented approach is at the core of our proposed search engine. Document representation, the retrieval method, and how results are presented to the user are all centred around the three tasks of diagnosis, test and treatment. Figure 1 shows the overall architecture of the system, which was developed using Elasticsearch. We detail the indexing, retrieval and visualisation components in the following sub-sections.
Student internship while studying at Southern Cross University.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for pro t or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the rst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permi ed. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speci c permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. SIGIR'17, August 7­11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan © 2017 ACM. 978-1-4503-5022-8/17/08. . . $15.00 DOI: h p://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3077136.3084136

2.1 Task-oriented indexing
In the indexing phase, medical articles are fed to a task extraction process that annotates mentions of diagnoses, tests and treatments. Task extraction is achieved by rst identifying mentions of medical concepts using a medical information extraction system [13]. e identi ed medical concepts are then mapped to higher level semantic types (e.g., the concept "Headache" belongs to the semantic type "Sign or Symptom"). Each semantic type can then be mapped to one of the three clinical tasks, diagnosis, treatment or test, by consulting the i2b2 challenge guidelines [15] which de ne a mapping between semantic types and clinical tasks. Once the tasks are identi ed, the original span of text from the article is annotated with details of the task type. A sample text, with annotated spans, is shown in Figure 2.
e resulting annotated articles are indexed into an inverted index with separate elds for diagnoses, tests and treatments.
2.2 Task-oriented retrieval
When a clinician poses a clinical query, they would typically be provided with a long list of search results. In the task-oriented approach, it is desirable to provide the clinician with a summary of the signi cant diagnoses, tests and treatments. is allows them to quickly gain an understanding of what they might expect to
nd when examining the search results. In addition, when these summaries are interactive (e.g., the searcher can drill-down on speci c tests or treatments) then they are provided with an easy mechanism to navigate the information space. To facilitate such interactions we implement the following retrieval strategy. Given a set of search results, we estimate signi cant diagnoses, tests and treatments. is is done by scoring each mention of a diagnosis, test or treatment (which can comprise of more than one terms) according to its frequency of appearance within the set of search results (foreground probability) vs. the frequency it appears within the collection as a whole (background probability).1 e top ve diagnoses, tests and treatments are displayed to the searcher (along with the regular search results for that query). Given an individual document within the search results, we also estimate the signi cant diagnoses, tests and treatments in that document according to IDF and display those to the user. As the underlying retrieval model, we adopted the default Elasticsearch BM25 model.
2.3 Task-oriented visualisation of results
A web-based interface provides the clinician with a means to search and interact with results. A screenshot of the user interface, presenting the results of a search for `malaria', is shown in Figure 3. e interface provides a single input box where clinicians can enter a free text, keyword query. Retrieval results are displayed as a ranked
1Details on this scoring method can be found in [6].

1329

Demonstration Paper

SIGIR'17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Indexing

Medical articles

Task extraction

Annotated medical articles

Task-oriented indexing of articles

Diagnosseess

Tests

User Interface

Treatments

Retrieval

Clinician searcher

Task-oriented retrieval Significant concept estimation
Figure 1: Overview of the task-oriented search approach.

Field-based inverted file index

Patients with a <test UMLSid= C2238079 title= blood smear >blood smear</test> found to be positive for <diagnosis UMLSid= C0024530 title= malaria [disease/finding] >malaria</diagnosis> were often administered <treatment UMLSid= C0034414 title= quinidine [chemical/ingredient] >quinidine</treatment>.
Figure 2: Text containing three task annotations: a test ("blood smear"), a diagnosis ("malaria") and a treatment ("quinidine").

list in decreasing order of relevance. Each result is comprised of the article title, journal title, publication date and a snippet.2
ree barplots provide an overview of the signi cant diagnoses (red), tests (orange) and treatments (green). ese plots are interactive: clinicians can click on a particular diagnosis, for example, and the set of search results would be ltered to include only articles mentioning that diagnosis; multiple lters can be applied.
e purpose of this interface was to allow the clinicians to, rstly, easily get an overview of the search results by inspecting the plots and, secondly, easily navigate the set of search results by applying various lters.
e clinician can view an article by clicking on its title. is opens a dialog displaying the full-text of the article with appropriate annotation displayed. A screenshot for a sample article showing the annotated diagnoses and treatments is shown in Figure 4.
3 COMPARISON WITH EXISTING METHODS
3.1 alitative comparison to other systems
While research on how clinicians search indicates that they pose queries according to three mains tasks (diagnoses, tests and treatment) [2], most systems for searching EBM resources do not take these tasks into account. However, structuring IR systems around di erent categories of information is a common approach in IR -- generally referred to as faceted retrieval [3]. Faceted retrieval reduces mental workload by promoting recognition over recall and by suggesting logical yet unexpected navigation paths to the user [16]. Meaningful facets have been found to support learning, re ection, discovery and information nding [8, 12, 16]. EBM-based search can be viewed as a complex search task [7]: clinicians have complex information needs and are o en time pressured. us, an IR approach such as faceted retrieval, which reduces mental overhead, is desirable. In this paper, we test the hypothesis that
2We used the default snippet generation provided by Elasticsearch.

faceted retrieval, which has shown bene ts in general web search, can improve search for EBM (Section 3.2).
e importance of access to biomedical literature has resulted in many biomedical-speci c retrieval systems [4]. While some systems mention di erent types of clinical queries (e.g., therapy, diagnosis, harm and prognosis) they typically did not integrate these into the retrieval method or in the way the searcher was presented with or interacted with the search results. Our system uses the clinical tasks as the bases for both retrieval and interaction. Finally, most methods for searching EBM resources were for research purposes, rather than clinical decision support. As such, recall was an important factor (i.e., nding all the relevant articles for a particular information need). In contrast, for clinical decision support, precision can be more important (i.e., nding the article that helps with the clinical task without reading many irrelevant articles). Our system bases the design of the IR system around improving precision via task-based ltering.
Some IR systems use diagnosis, test and treatment information as features in a retrieval model. A common approach here is to map all queries and documents being searched to medical concepts according to an external domain-knowledge resource; matching is then done at the concept level, comparing a query concept with a document concept [9, 10, 14]. Although concept retrieval using tasks has proved e ective, the tasks were simply used as features within the retrieval model and never exposed to the clinician [9, 10]. In this study, we a empt to make the task-based information explicit in the way the clinician interacts with the system, as well as the basis for the underlying retrieval model.
In summary, while other studies a empt to extract detailed, structured information from medical articles, we adopt a lightweight approach by considering only diagnoses, tests and treatments. ese three tasks were treated in a facet-based approach, which has proved e ective in improving search interactions in other domains. e tasks-oriented information is used not only as

1330

Demonstration Paper

SIGIR'17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Figure 3: Screenshot showing the results of a search for `malaria'. ree barplots provide an overview of the signi cant diagnoses (red), tests (orange) and treatments (green). Individual search results are shown below the barplots.
Figure 4: An sample medical article from the user interface showing annotated diagnoses (red) and treatments (green).
1331

Demonstration Paper

SIGIR'17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Table 1: Retrieval results for task-oriented search. All results showed statistical signi cance over `No lter' baseline (paired t test, p < 0.01).

Task-oriented lter- Prec.@10 (%) Recip. rank (%) ing

No lter Diagnoses Tests Treatments

0.2867 0.3250 (+13%) 0.3283 (+15%) 0.3167 (+10%)

0.4349 0.5271 (+21%) 0.5324 (+22%) 0.5113 (+16%)

a feature in retrieval but also as a means for improving the way clinicians might interact with the system.
3.2 Empirical evaluation of task-based lters
e task-oriented system was evaluated using the TREC Clinical Decision Support (CDS) test collection. Retrieval e ectiveness of the system without ltering was compared with that of the system with a speci c task lter. To evaluate the e ectiveness of task-based
ltering we conducted the following experiment. First, we issued each TREC CDS query topic to the retrieval system and, with no
ltering, evaluated the corresponding precision @ 10 and mean reciprocal rank. We then simulated the clinician interacting with the results by selecting individual diagnoses, tests and treatments as lters. Speci cally, we ltered the search results, one at a time, by each of the top- ve diagnoses, tests and treatments; for example,
lter with only the rst treatment and evaluate the results, then lter with only the second treatment and evaluate the results, etc. Evaluation measures were calculated a er each lter had been applied. us, the change in e ectiveness between the rst (`no lter') search and each of the subsequent task-oriented searches could be calculated. e retrieval e ectiveness of the three di erent task types could be compared and contrasted.
e retrieval e ectiveness are shown in Table 1. e results show that task-oriented ltering led to a statistically signi cant improvement in precision @ 10 and mean reciprocal rank. Filtering on tests exhibited the greatest improvement, followed by ltering on diagnosis and, nally, ltering on treatments.
4 IMPACT AND OUTLOOK
An important consideration for clinicians, who are o en timepressured, is any labour saving bene ts that a system can provide. As well as improving retrieval e ectiveness, our system can help reduce work load. Speci cally, task-based ltering reduces the number of documents the clinician needs to view. A more detailed economic analysis, simulating a user applying various task-based
lters, revealed cost savings when compared to not ltering [6]. Plainly put, the cost of choosing and applying a task-based lter is far less than reading even a single non relevant document. us, even for the same retrieval e ectiveness, viewing less document o ers bene ts to clinicians.
Search engines for evidence-based medicine may particularly bene t junior doctors, who are still coming to grips with a large and evolving body of medical literature. It is this cohort of users that we hope to recruit as users of the system. While the empirical evaluation has shown improvements in retrieval e ectiveness and cost savings in using the task-based system, the ultimate evaluation

of the system is with real users, especially given the specialist
domain of medical search. An A/B test with and without task-
oriented ltering is planned to evaluate the system with real users.
In the current system, users explicitly initiate a search by enter-
ing ad-hoc queries via a free-text input box. However, in clinical
practice there are situations where a search may be implicitly ini-
tiated by a user. A common scenario for this is when a clinician
opens an electronic patient record -- an e ective system would
retrieve relevant diagnosis, test or treatment oriented results based
on the contents of the patient record. While the current system sup-
ports retrieval of such results, the process of generating an e ective
query from a verbose patient record is needed. Initial research on
automatically generating clinical queries is underway [5].
Clinical practice that is informed by scienti c evidence is known
to improve quality of care [1]. A common means of integrating this
evidence-based approach into clinical practice is through clinical
decision support systems, which are also known to improve qual-
ity of care [11]. e system we describe in this paper provides a
means for clinicians to access evidence-based literature in a clinical
decision support se ing. Improvements in retrieval e ectiveness us-
ing task-based lters equate to improved access to evidence-based
medicine resources. Coupled with the cost savings of using the
system, there are good indications that the use of the system can
lead to improved clinical decisions and, ultimately, patient care.
REFERENCES
[1] David M Eddy and John Billings. 1988. e quality of medical evidence: implications for quality of care. Health A airs 7, 1 (1988), 19­32.
[2] J.W. Ely, J.A. Oshero , P.N. Gorman, M.H. Ebell, M.L. Chambliss, E.A. Pifer, and P.Z. Stavri. 2000. A taxonomy of generic clinical questions: classi cation study. British Medical Journal 321, 7258 (2000), 429­432.
[3] Marti Hearst, Ame Ellio , Jennifer English, Rashmi Sinha, Kirsten Swearingen, and Ka-Ping Yee. 2002. Finding the Flow in Web Site Search. Commun. ACM 45, 9 (2002), 42­49.
[4] William Hersh. 2009. Information retrieval: a health and biomedical perspective (3rd ed.). Springer Verlag, New York.
[5] Bevan Koopman, Liam Cripwell, and Guido Zuccon. 2017. Generating Clinical eries from Patient Narratives: A Comparison between Machines and Humans.
In SIGIR. Tokyo, Japan. [6] Bevan Koopman, Jack Russell, and Guido Zuccon. 2017. Task-oriented search
for evidence-based medicine. Inter. Journal of Digital Libraries (2017), 1­13. [7] Bevan Koopman and Guido Zuccon. 2014. Why Assessing Relevance in Medical
IR is Demanding. In MedIR, SIGIR. Gold Coast, Australia. [8] Barbara H Kwasnik. 2000. e role of classi cation in knowledge representation
and discovery. Library trends 48, 1 (2000). [9] Nut Limsopatham, Craig Macdonald, and Iadh Ounis. 2013. A Task-Speci c
ery and Document Representation for Medical Records Search. In ECIR. Moscow, Russia. [10] Zhenyu Liu and Wesley W. Chu. 2007. Knowledge-based query expansion to support scenario-speci c retrieval of medical free text. Information Retrieval 10, 2 (2007), 173­202. [11] E. V. Murphy. 2014. Clinical decision support: e ectiveness in improving quality processes and clinical outcomes and factors that may in uence success. Yale J Biol Med 87, 2 (Jun 2014), 187­197. [12] Dagobert Soergel. 1999. e rise of ontologies or the reinvention of classi cation. JASIST 50, 12 (1999), 1119. [13] Luca Soldaini and Nazli Goharian. 2016. ickUMLS: a fast, unsupervised approach for medical concept extraction. In SIGIR MedIR Workshop. [14] Dolf Trieschnigg, Djoerd Hiemstra, Franciska de Jong, and Wessel Kraaij. 2010. A cross-lingual framework for monolingual biomedical information retrieval. In CIKM. ACM, 169­178. [15] O¨ zlem Uzuner, Bre R South, Shuying Shen, and Sco L DuVall. 2011. 2010 i2b2/VA challenge on concepts, assertions, and relations in clinical text. JASIST 18, 5 (2011), 552­556. [16] Ryen W White. 2016. Interactions with search systems. Cambridge University Press.

1332

