Short Research Paper

SIGIR'17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Exploring the ery Halo E ect in Site Search
Leading People to Longer eries

Djoerd Hiemstra
University of Twente Enschede, e Netherlands
hiemstra@cs.utwente.nl

Claudia Hau
Del University of Technology Del , e Netherlands c.hau @tudel .nl

Leif Azzopardi
University of Strathclyde Glasgow, Scotland
leif.azzopardi@strath.ac.uk

ABSTRACT
People tend to type short queries, however, the belief is that longer queries are more e ective. Consequently, a number of a empts have been made to encourage and motivate people to enter longer queries. While most have failed, a recent a empt -- conducted in a laboratory setup -- in which the query box has a halo or glow e ect, that changes as the query becomes longer, has been shown to increase query length by one term, on average. In this paper, we test whether a similar increase is observed when the same component is deployed in a production system for site search and used by real end users. To this end, we conducted two separate experiments, where the rate at which the color changes in the halo were varied. In both experiments users were assigned to one of two conditions: halo and no-halo. e experiments were ran over a y day period with 3,506 unique users submi ing over six thousand queries. In both experiments, however, we observed no signi cant di erence in query length. We also did not nd longer queries to result in greater retrieval performance. While, we did not reproduce the previous
ndings, our results indicate that the query halo e ect appears to be sensitive to performance and task, limiting its applicability to other contexts.
KEYWORDS
ery length; Halo; A/B testing; Research replication
1 INTRODUCTION
Providing a more detailed and richer description of an information need by issuing a longer query has been considered as a fundamental way for users to indicate to the system what is relevant [7]. However, most users tend to express very short ­ two to three ­ term queries [3, 6, 13]. As a result a number of e orts have been made which a empt to lead people to longer queries [2, 7, 8, 11]. It is commonly believed that longer queries (and thus a richer description of the user's underlying information need) will result in be er retrieval performance [7].
In this paper, we explore the query halo e ect, proposed in [2], where the search box glows and changes colour as the user types.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for pro t or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the rst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permi ed. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speci c permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. SIGIR '17, August 07-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan © 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. 978-1-4503-5022-8/17/08. . . $15.00 DOI: 10.1145/3077136.3080696

In [2], Agapie et al. showed that the this halo e ect led people to enter longer queries in the context of complex Web search tasks. We now a empt to reproduce this nding in a di erent context: site search. Crucially, while [2] was performed in a laboratory se ing only, we a empt to reproduce the ndings in a live se ing with users issuing queries to ful ll their own information needs. To this end, we consider the following Research Questions:
RQ1 Does the query halo e ect lead people to longer queries in a natural se ing? Or alternatively phrased: can we reproduce the ndings in [2] in a di erent context?
RQ2 Does the assumption of longer queries being more effective hold in this se ing?
We empirically investigated these questions in a 50-day long A/B test setup implemented in a university site search engine. Our analyses are based on more than 6,000 submi ed queries in that time period. We nd that the query halo e ect did not entice people to submit longer queries: there was no signi cant di erence between the halo condition and no-halo condition across the two experiments performed. We also nd that longer queries, in this context, do not necessarily result in be er retrieval performance. We hypothesize that for the query halo e ect to take hold, the retrieval performance needs to be positively correlated with query length and the search task needs to be complex as in [2].
2 BACKGROUND
Numerous studies have examined the length of queries submi ed by users to search systems in a number of di erent se ings. For Web-based queries the average number of terms is around 2.3 (2.35 Excite logs [13], 2.34 AOL logs [3], 2 (mode) MS logs [6]), while site search queries tend to be slightly shorter with a term length around 2.2 (2 (mode) UTennesse log [14] and 2.2 U.S. Government logs [9]). Since queries are typically short in the Web se ing, a driving hypothesis for leading people to longer queries is based on the strong assumption that: longer queries result in be er retrieval performance. However, in previous works [2, 7, 8, 11] this was not explicitly tested. In [4], Azzopardi studied the relationship between query length and retrieval performance (mean average precision) in the context of ad-hoc search on a number of TREC test collections using best match retrieval algorithms. In this simulated batch setup, performance does increase, but at a diminishing rate of return; queries of 2 to 3 terms in length result in the highest rate of return. With respect to the previous and present study on leading people to longer queries, the analysis con rmed that query length and performance are positively correlated, but only in a speci c context. Production search systems, however, o en use strategies beyond best match algorithms ­ typing more query terms o en reduces the number of results returned as terms are implicitly ANDed together.

981

Short Research Paper

SIGIR'17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

So it is not clear whether the query-length assumption holds in such a se ing or for other tasks.
Karlgren and Franze´n [11] were one of the rst to try and lead people to longer queries in a laboratory setup by changing the query input design. ey modi ed the single-line query input box used by Web search engines and designed a query text box with multiple lines, such that the query terms would wrap as you typed ­ in the belief that this would illicit longer queries than the single-line query box. In the context of Web search, Karlgren and Franze´n found indeed that participants entered signi cantly longer queries using the multi-line input box. Belkin et al. [7] later hypothesized that this increase in query length was due to: (i) the larger perceived space and (ii) the visibility of the entire query (as in the single-line condition the query could be partially hidden if it is too long).
Belkin et al. [7] a empted to replicate Karlgren and Franze´n's nding in a slightly di erent context and also explored whether instructing users to enter questions as their query as opposed to key words, would lead to longer queries. In the context of a lab-based se ing (as part of the TREC interactive track), their results showed that when participants were in the "instruction" condition, they submi ed signi cantly longer queries. is is not too surprising, because turning a query for "Gar eld" into a question will require at least one more term, e.g. "Who is Gar eld?". Interestingly, they were unable to reproduce Karlgren and Franze´n's nding with respect to the di erent query box input modes. ey found no di erence between the multi-line and single line query box modes.
Belkin et al. [8] then followed up, by designing an experiment where the baseline interface was a multi-line query box and the experimental condition which used the same interface but included instructions to the participants: "Information problem description (the more you say, the be er the results are likely to be)". is instruction led the lab study participants in the experimental condition to enter on average two more query terms than the participants in the control condition.
Agapie et al. [2] hypothesized that a halo around the query box that re ects the length of the query being created could mitigate people's tendency to issue short queries. Speci cally, they further hypothesized that this halo e ect would "nudge" people to type in more query terms. In their experiments, they set up a 2x2 factorial design, where on one dimension they included a halo vs. no-halo, and on the other dimension they provided instructions vs. no instructions. In the instruction condition, the 61 lab study participants were told that, "[the] system performs be er with longer queries." Agapie et al. found the halo to lead the participants to construct signi cantly longer queries. However, drilling down, this was most pronounced when the halo was present, but no instructions (6.6 query terms on av.). When the halo and instructions were provided, they did not observe any signi cant increase in query length (4.5 query terms on av.). When only instructions were provided it resulted in longer queries (5.3) when compared to no halo and no instruction (4.2). In a subsequent experiment, they compared four conditions: no-halo, halo (pink to blue), inverted halo (blue to pink) and a static halo (blue). Again, they observed that the halo e ect (pink to blue) resulted in signi cantly longer queries than no halo or a static halo. However the inverted halo did not lead people to signi cantly longer queries.

In the aforementioned studies, performance, in terms of precisionrecall based measures, is not reported or considered, so it is actually unclear whether an increase in query length would translate into improved performance ­ and thus increased satisfaction for the user. In a recent theoretical cost-bene t analysis of query length and retrieval performance Azzopardi and Zuccon [5] show that in order for users to increase their query length either the retrieval performance needs to increase or the cost of entering terms needs to be reduced. In previous works on leading people to longer queries, neither the performance of the system is increased, nor is the cost of entering a query reduced. As such, their theory suggests that in practice larger query boxes or halo e ects, which do not modify either of these, are not going to lead to longer queries.
3 REPRODUCING THE HALO EFFECT
Reproducibility, the ability of an experimental study to be duplicated independently, recently gained renewed a ention in computer science and especially in information retrieval. e ACM's policy on Result and Artifact Review and Badging [10] distinguishes repeatability (same team, same experimental setup), replicability (di erent team, same experimental setup), and reproducibility (different team, di erent experimental setup). Ferro et al. [1] investigated the problems and approaches to reproducibility in information retrieval and various other sub- elds of computer science.
In line with those initiatives, our experiments aim to reproduce the work by Agapie et al. [2] in a live search engine. Experiments were run on the site search engine of the University of Twente1, a federated search engine [12] searching 35 resources including Google's site search, local courses, local news, the telephone directory, the university timetables, as well as results from the university's social media feeds, such as Facebook, Twi er and Flickr. Given a query2, the search engine returns ranked resource blocks with each block containing up to four (up to seven in the case of images) ranked items; each resource can only contribute a single block to a ranking. Figure 1 shows an example result page for the query "library" with three ranked blocks. Our query log records contain for each query the URLs of the search results that were clicked as well as the block rank of the clicked result. As the vast majority of queries yielded a single click, we computed the block rank MRR (the mean reciprocal rank over all submi ed queries in the respective condition) as our system's measure of retrieval performance.
e implementation uses the open source federated search engine Searsia3. Experiments were run as A/B tests where users were assigned randomly to either the control condition (the standard search box, labelled henceforth as no-halo condition) or the experimental condition (the search box with the query halo e ect, labelled as halo condition).
e query halo e ect was implemented as described by Agapie et al. [2]. e empty query input box has a pink (RGB #FF1493) halo that surrounds the text box. As the user types into the box, the halo begins to change color ­ becoming less and less pink, and then starts becoming more and more blue (RGB #3366CC). To adhere to
1h ps://utwente.nl/search 2In the 50-day period of our study, the ve most popular queries were minor, matlab, library, ces and eduroam. 3h p://searsia.org

982

Short Research Paper

SIGIR'17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Figure 3: Overview of the halo's full color spectrum. e extrema encode 0 terms (or 0 characters) on the le and 7 terms (or 22 characters) on the right.

Figure 1: Example block-based ranking. the university site's style, the halo surrounding the query box was slightly less wide4 than in [2]. Figure 2 shows an example of the halo e ect for queries of di erent lengths; Figure 3 shows the full color spectrum of the halo.
Figure 2: Example of the character transition halo e ect. In [2], the color was interpolated between pink and blue, with
queries of seven words or longer showing the bluest halo. While not explicitly noted in [2], the choice of colours seemed to be decided based on accessibility, as for example, red/pink to green may not have been distinguishable (due to red/green colour blindness).
e transition from pink to blue was based on word boundaries.
4Speci cally, the query box's CSS property box-shadow contains a spread-radius of 3 pixels; the query box's border-color was set to the same color as the halo.

However to avoid it appearing mechanistic, a small (up to 100 millisecond delay) was randomly introduced.
In our work, we implemented two versions of the query halo: (i) a term-based transition, as done in [2] where a er seven terms the halo was bluest, and (ii) a character-based transition query halo box, where the transition was based on characters and moved more smoothly from pink to blue, where a er 22 characters the halo was the most bluish. is version shows a more immediate, but less obvious, change of colour as characters are typed.
4 RESULTS
4.1 Experiment 1: term halo vs. no-halo
e rst experiment ran between January 6, 2017 and January 31, 2017. In this period, in the no-halo condition, 884 di erent users submi ed 1, 623 queries (1, 301 unique). Assigned to the halo condition were 803 users who issued 1, 367 queries (1, 122 unique).
Table 1 (top) contains the results of this experiment. Users in the control condition submit on average 2.18 query terms, users in the halo condition match this almost perfectly with an average query length of 2.16. Spli ing the users according to their experience with the search system ­ users submi ed a single query across the three weeks (single query users) vs. users submi ing two or more queries (2+ query users) ­ does not yield a di erent picture. Figure 4 shows the query distribution across query term length, the halo condition does not lead users to change their querying behaviour with respect to query length. More than 70% of all issued queries contain either 1 or 2 terms.
4.2 Experiment 2: character halo vs. no-halo
e second experiment ran between February 1, 2017 and February 25, 2017. In the no-halo condition, 857 di erent users submi ed 1, 395 queries (1, 157 unique). In the halo condition, 919 users issued 1, 641 queries of which 1, 314 were unique. In Table 1 the results of this experiment are summarized. e more dynamic change of the halo has no e ect: users in both the control and experimental conditions submit queries of similar length. Overall, we conclude that the query halo e ect does not lead to longer queries in this context and live se ing.
4.3 Longer queries lead to more clicks?
In order to evaluate the suitability of the assumption that longer queries perform be er, we compute the block MRR across all the 6, 026 queries in our 50-day log (combined over conditions and experiments). Figure 5 shows that in our production system the common assumption that longer queries perform be er does not hold: longer queries do not lead to more clicks on be er ranked result blocks, and thus do not lead to higher MRR. eries with 2 to 4 terms perform similarly. In order to verify the quality of the

983

Short Research Paper

SIGIR'17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Table 1: Overview of the average query length (and standard deviation) in terms (Experiment 1) and characters (Experiment 2). None of the di erences are signi cant.

Experiment 1 (terms)

no-halo

halo

All queries Single query users 2+ query users

2.18 (1.36) 2.06 (1.11) 2.25 (1.48)

2.16 (1.32) 2.15 (1.40) 2.17 (1.27)

Experiment 2 (characters)

no-halo

halo

All queries

16.52 (11.81) 16.39 (10.18)

Single query users 16.44 (12.03) 15.39 (10.14)

2+ query users

16.58 (11.65) 17.00 (10.16)

Query Distribution

0.4 no halo

0.35

halo

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

1

2

3

4

5

Query Length (in terms)

Figure 4: Number of queries issued for each condition in Experiment 1.

0.65

0.6

Block MRR

0.55

0.5

0.45

0.4

1

2

3

4

5

Query Length (in terms)

Figure 5: Mean reciprocal rank (block-based) computed over all queries in our log.

system, in Figure 6 we plot the distribution of search result across the ranked blocks: the vast majority (80%) of clicks appear within the rst block as one would expect for a functioning production system.

Probability of Click

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Rank

Figure 6: Frequency of search result clicks on ranked blocks computed over all queries in our log.

5 CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we a empted to reproduce the "query halo" e ect observed (in a lab se ing over complex search tasks) by Agapie et al. [2] in the context of site search with users serving there own information needs. We were not able to reproduce the e ect, instead observing no di erences in the control vs. experimental conditions. Furthermore, in contrast to a common assumption, we found li le di erence in retrieval performance across query length (between 2-4 terms). ese results motivate further work in unpicking the complexities and relationships between query length, performance, task and motivators.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to Anne Heining of U. Twente Media & Communication for supporting the A/B tests.
REFERENCES
[1] Nicola Ferro and Norbert Fuhr and Kalervo Ja¨rvelin and Noriko Kando and Ma hias Lippold and Justin Zobel. 2016. Increasing Reproducibility in Information Retrieval: Findings from the Dagstuhl Seminar on Reproducibility of Data-Oriented Experiments in e-Science. SIGIR Forum 50, 1, 68­82.
[2] Elena Agapie, Gene Golovchinsky, and Pernilla Qvarfordt. 2013. Leading people to longer queries. In Proceedings of SIGCHI'13. 3019­3022.
[3] Avi Arampatzis and Jaap Kamps. 2008. A Study of ery Length. In Proceedings of SIGIR'08. 811­812.
[4] Leif Azzopardi. 2009. ery Side Evaluation: An Empirical Analysis of E ectiveness and E ort. In Proceedings of SIGIR'09. 556­563.
[5] Leif Azzopardi and Guido Zuccon. 2016. An Analysis of the Cost and Bene t of Search Interactions. In Proceedings of ICTIR'16. 59­68.
[6] Peter Bailey, Ryen W. White, Han Liu, and Giridhar Kumaran. 2010. Mining Historic ery Trails to Label Long and Rare Search Engine eries. ACM Trans. Web 4, 4, Article 15.
[7] Nicholas Belkin, Colleen Cool, Judy Jeng, A. Keller, Diane Kelly, Jay Kim, Hyuk Lee, M.-C. Tang, and X.-J. Yuan. 2001. Rutgers TREC 2001 Interactive Track Experience. In e 10th text retrieval conference (TREC).
[8] Nicholas Belkin, Diane Kelly, G. Kim, Jay Kim, Hyuk Lee, G. Muresan, M.-C. Tang, X.-J. Yuan, and Colleen Cool. 2003. ery Length in Interactive Information Retrieval. In Proceedings of SIGIR'03. 205­212.
[9] Michael Chau, Xiao Fang, and Olivia R. Liu Sheng. 2005. Analysis of the ery Logs of a Web Site Search Engine. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol. 56, 13, 1363­1376.
[10] Association for Computing Machinery. 2016. Result and Artifact Review and Badging. h ps://www.acm.org/publications/policies/artifact-review-badging.
[11] Kristofer Franze´n and Jussi Kalgren. 1997. Verbosity and interface design. In SICS Technical Report: T2000:04, Retrieved online at: h p://soda.swedish-ict.se/ 2623/2/irinterface.pdf on May 11, 2013.
[12] Milad Shokouhi and Luo Si. 2011. Federated search. Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval 5, 1 (2011), 1­102.
[13] Craig Silverstein, Hannes Marais, Monika Henzinger, and Michael Moricz. 1999. Analysis of a very large Web search engine query log. SIGIR Forum 33, 1, 6­12.
[14] Peiling Wang, Michael W. Berry, and Yiheng Yang. 2003. Mining Longitudinal Web eries: Trends and Pa erns. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol. 54, 8, 743­758.

984

