Smallpox Illustrated: A Practical Treatise on Smallpox. Illustrated by Coloured Photographs from Life. By George Henry Fox, M.D., 2sTew York. Philadelphia and London : J. B. Lippincott Co.

Smallpox. By James Wallace, M.D., London. London : Henry
J. Glaisher.

,,

This work is an attempt to illustrate, by a series of coloured plates,

Y lent stages and varieties of the smallpox eruption. It certainly

w'M .

s^uc^en^ a verJ

^ea of the appearances presented by

V1Ve the disease. The photographs are all excellent, and the colouring, if not

* ove criticism, is superior to anything we have hitherto seen. The

^est plates are those which show the eruption in its full development,

illustrating semi-confluent and
s/?Je being especially good. Others,

confluent smallpox again, representing

in the pustular the crusting of

^agee pocks, are also excellent. The least successful pictures are those

,VC 1 ^lustrate the papular stage. On the whole, however, the

ec 1011 plates makes a valuable addition to any medical library,

366

?
REVIEWS.

forming, as they do, a photographic record of all the stages of the
disease.
Unfortunately, the account of smallpox given in the letterpress is somewhat incomplete. Dr. Fox makes no mention of etiological or pathological questions, and his description of the symptomatology of the fever is very brief, and appears to us to be insufficient for the requirements of the student. He only mentions the course of the temperature incidentally, and it is surprising to find a book, so magnificently illustrated, without a single temperature chart to give an idea of the primary and secondary fevers. On the other hand, the section on treatment is very good and practical, and is full of common-sense advice. A very adequate account of vaccination finishes the book.
2. In his very short monograph Dr. Wallace has made use of Dr. Savill's very complete report of the smallpox epidemic of 1892-3 in Warrington. The public health aspect of the question is carefully considered, and the figures relating to vaccination and revaccination are admirably and clearly arranged. As regards the question of the aerial convection of the poison, Dr. Wallace shows that this theory is not supported by the experience at Warrington, where indeed the greatest incidence of the disease in the neighbourhood of the hospital occurred on the windward side, and ample opportunities for infection in other ways were present. The space at our disposal hardly allows us to do justice to this very thorough little work, which will be found useful by practitioners who are anxious to get up recent facts regarding the results of vaccination, and by educated laymen who have doubts as to the efficacy of vaccination as a protection.
Claude B. Ker.

