ROYAL COLLEGE OF SURGEONS.
The President and Fellows of the Royal College of Surgeons held their first conversazione for the season in their large hall, on Friday evening, Dec. 5th. It was numerously attended by the members of the College, andinvitations had been issued to the Fellows of the Royal College of Physicians, and to the members of the medical profession generally. Dr Andrew Wood, P.R.C.S., presided, and welcomed the guests, which included the Lord Provost, Dr Maclagan, President of the Royal College of Physicians, Dr Deas, C.B., Dr Archibald Gordon, C.B., Mr Lister, sen., Professors Christison, Syme, Goodsir, Allman, Bennett, and Balfour, Staff-Surgeon Anderson, Bailie Blackadder, Bailie Grieve, Dean of Guild Wemyss, Mr R. Chambers, etc. The President, in opening the proceedings, referred to the great success which had attended their meetings in this hall last winter, to which they had in turn invited the leading members of all the various literary and scientific professions. The series, now to be commenced, promised to be fully as interesting and attractive, and he had great pleasure in announcing that, among those to whom they would have the pleasure of listening in the course of the season were, Professor George Wilson, Professor Allen Thomson of Glasgow, Professor Balfour, and their Conservator, Dr Sanders.
The lectui'e of the evening was delivered by Joseph Lister, Esq., F.R.C.S., Eng. and Edin., Assistant-Surgeon to the Royal Infirmary, and Lecturer on Surgery, " On the Early Stages of Inflammation, as observed in the Foot of the Frog."
After alluding shortly to the structure of the blood vessels and the nature of the blood, Mr Lister discussed at considerable length the physiology of the circulation, lie next gave a sketch of the opinions of the principal authorities

654

MEDICAL NEWS.

regarding the appearances presented by the web of the frog's foot under circumstances of irritation ; and then proceeded to describe various experiments and observations of his own, which had led him to the inference, that inflammation consists essentially in diminution of the functional activity of a part, and that the effects upon the blood are secondary phenomena. Mr Lister illustrated his statements with numerous diagrams, enlarged from his original
sketches.
Professor Goodsir, in proposing a vote of thanks to the lecturer, spoke in high terms of the originality and importance of his observations and conclusions, and expressed his belief that they had that evening had but the first fruits of those hereditary powers which Mr Lister undoubtedly possessed, and which must enable him not only to take a high position as a man of science, but also to add to the reputation of the school with which he had connected
himself.
Professor Bennett seconded the motion in complimentary terms. The thanks of the meeting were accordingly conveyed to Mr Lister by the President. The company then withdrew to the adjoining hall, where tea and coffee were served, and separated about half-past ten.

