July 2022

Photo Essay

2691

Commentary: Ocular histoplasmosis and nocardiosis coinfection: A rare presentation
Systemic histoplasmosis is ubiquitous, and the causative fungus is found in the soil fertilized by birds, chicken, and bats.[14] Histoplasmosis is common in immunosuppressed individuals and may present with mild influenza, which often leads to granulomatous disease and can even progress to lifethreatening disease.[14] In developing countries such as India, it can mimic tuberculosis.[3,4] Ocular manifestations of systemic histoplasmosis include retinitis, choroiditis, optic neuritis, uveitis, and endophthalmitis.[14] Presumed ocular histoplasmosis syndrome (POHS) may present with peripheral retinal or choroidal involvement called "histo spots," and they mostly have clear vitreous, unlike systemic histoplasmosis.[1,2] POHS is mostly immunologic. Choroidal neovascular membrane is a known complication of histo spots in POHS.[1,2]
Nocardia, on the other hand, is a bacterial infection that causes invasive disease involving skin, eyes, and lungs.[5,6] Every bodily organ can be affected by Nocardia.[59] Several studies conducted in southern India on Nocardia keratitis have found that initial diagnosis can be easily missed and delayed diagnoses were commonly encountered in these studies.[6,7] Studies from Hyderabad, India have concluded that Nocardia keratitis constitutes 1.7% of all bacterial keratitis cases.[6,7] Nocardia keratitis has a characteristic appearance on slitlamp examination.[6,7] Punctate epithelial erosions and anterior corneal stromal infiltrates are seen in wreath patterned appearance with adjoining satellite lesions.[6,7] Infiltrates can also be found in the midperiphery of cornea.[6,7] Nocardia scleritis and endophthalmitis have also been reported in literature.[69] Nocardia is a Grampositive, aerobic organism found in soil and infection is usually exogenous.[59] They are weak acidfast bacilli and can be picked up by Kinyoun's acidfast staining as well. Arial hyphae are also seen.[8,9]

In the present article, a rare case of coinfection of histoplasmosis and Nocardia has been presented in a 48yearold Indian man who was immunocompromised.[1] The patient presented with a conjunctival mass in the right eye and on histopathology, encapsulated bodies with bloated macrophages were observed, suggesting diagnosis of histoplasmosis.[1] Patient had past history of using systemic immunosuppressants and was taking oral steroids and tablet tacrolimus.[1] He had renal transplantation previously for mesangioproliferative glomerulonephritis.[1] Additionally, he had history of fever, cough, and multiple abscesses on thigh with discharging sinuses. Computed tomography of thorax revealed bilateral lung nocardiosis.[1] Cerebral abscess was also noted on imaging.[1] Fineneedle aspiration cytology of lung nodule and thigh abscess revealed Nocardia farcinica infection, for which he was treated with systemic antibiotics and regulation of immunosuppressives.[1] Local amphotericin 0.15% eye drop was prescribed in the postoperative period for the right eye.[1]
This dual infection in an immunocompromised, postrenal transplant patient was a challenge as systemic antifungal medications could lead to a compromised kidney function.[1] Systemic infection by Nocardia with foci in lung, brain, and thigh complicated the situation further. In metastatic nocardiosis, antibiotics have to be added by the concerned physician/ internist for the best possible management. Cotrimoxazole sometimes work best in such a situation.[1] At the same time, baseline immunosuppressives have to be continued in the patient.[1] In such a situation, it is advisable for the patient to be admitted in the hospital.[1] The author (s) could have provided detailed neurological and complete systemic workup. Consideration to include concerned specialists for such complicated cases should also be kept in mind for the best possible management.[1]
As new infectious diseases are emerging, they continue to be among the leading causes of mortality.[10] Medical management and drug resistance have increased

2692

IndianJournalofOphthalmology

Volume 70 Issue 7

tremendously in the last decade. Monitoring and evaluation under the supervision of the Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN)[10] for containment of various infections has come into existence.[10] Advances have been made in microbial detection and susceptibility systems.[10] Molecular methods are useful in situations where conventional methods fail to diagnose the causative organisms.[10]
It is a natural query for all of us that why there are multiple infections in immunosuppressed individuals. As in host cells, defense mechanisms are altered by CD4 cells, which are seen more in infected cases with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) involvement.[10] Follicular cells from the lymphoid tissue become susceptible to the infection even without involving CD4 cells, particularly in exogenous infections affecting skin, cornea, and so on. Lymphopenia, selective Tcell deficiency, decreased delayed hypersensitivity reaction on skin test, hypergammaglobulinemia (IgG, IgA, and IgM), and polyclonal activation of B cells can induce such infections. Majority of Nocardia species have mycolic acid in their cell wall and trehalose 66 dimycolate, a cord factor which is important for virulence.[5,6] The cord factor has been found to be interlacing with phagocytosis, by various macrophages in the lysosomes.[5,6]

Shrivastava R, et al. Bilateral endogenous endophthalmitis in disseminated histoplasmosis secondary to immunosuppression: A rare case report. TNOA J Ophthalmic Sci Res 2018;56:10810.
4. Patel AK, Patel KK, Toshniwal H, Gohel S, Chakrabarti A. Histoplasmosis in nonendemic NorthWestern part of India. Indian J Med Microbiol 2018;36:614.
5. Margalit I, Goldberg E, Ben Ari Y, BenZvi H, Shostak Y, Krause I, et al. Clinical correlates of nocardiosis. Sci Rep 2020;10:14272. doi: 10.1038/s41598020712144.
6. Garg P, Rao GN. Corneal ulcer: Diagnosis and management. Community Eye Health 1999;12:213.
7. DeCroos FC, Garg P, Reddy AK, Sharma A, Krishnaiah S, Mungale M, et al. Optimizing diagnosis and management of nocardia keratitis, scleritis, and endophthalmitis: 11year microbial and clinical overview. Ophthalmology 2011;118:1193200.
8. Yagishita M, Tsuboi H, Tabuchi D, Sugita T, Nishiyama T, Okamoto S, et al. Clinical features and prognosis of nocardiosis in patients with connective tissue diseases. Mod Rheumatol 2021;31:63642.
9. Tran T, Symes R, Nolan T. Systemic nocardiosis presenting with subretinal abscess in patient with Hodgkin's lymphoma. Clin Exp Ophthalmol 2020;48:1179.
10. Christensen R, Fisher D, Salmon S, Drury P, Effler P. Training for outbreak response through the global outbreak alert and response network. BMC Med 2021;19:123.

Dipankar Das, Harsha Bhattacharjee1, Obaidur Rehman1, Sakshi Mishra1
Ocular Pathology, Uveitis and Neuroophthalmology Services, 1Departmant of Ophthalmology, Sri Sankaradeva Nethralaya,
Guwahati, Assam, India
Correspondence to: Dr. Dipankar Das, Senior Consultant and HOD, Uvea and Ocular Pathology, Department of Ocular Pathology, Uveitis and Neuroophthalmology Services, Sri Sankaradeva Nethralaya, Guwahati  781 028, Assam,
India. Email: dr_dasdipankar@yahoo.com
References
1. Behera RK, Gupta PC, Khurana S, Sehgal S, Sharma S, Ram J. A rare presentation of ocular histoplasmosis in a patient with systemic nocardiosis. Indian J Ophthalmol 2022;70:2689-91.
2. Kawali A, Mahendradas P, Sanjay S, K M P, Yadav J, Panchagnula R, et al. Diagnostic and therapeutic challenges in ocular histoplasmosisA case report. Ocul Immunol Inflamm 2020;15:14.
3. Hawaibam S, Das D, Soibam R, Bhattacharjee H, Deshmukh S,

This is an open access journal, and articles are distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons AttributionNonCommercialShareAlike 4.0 License, which allows others to remix, tweak, and build upon the work noncommercially, as long as appropriate credit is given and the new creations are licensed under the identical terms.

Access this article online

Quick Response Code:

Website: www.ijo.in

DOI: 10.4103/ijo.IJO_131_22

PMID: ***

Cite this article as: Das D, Bhattacharjee H, Rehman O, Mishra S. Commentary: Ocular histoplasmosis and nocardiosis coinfection: A rare presentation. Indian J Ophthalmol 2022;70:2691-2.

