ON THE CHEMISTRY AND TOXICOLOGY OF NERIUM 0 DO RUM, WITH A DESCRIP-
TION OF A NEWLY-SEPARATED ACTIVE PRINCIPLE.
(The Coates' Memorial Prize Essay

By RAI CHUNILAL BOSB BAHADOOR, M.B., F.C.S
asst.-surgeon.

AdAdsistt.ionPraolfeCshseomricoaflChEexmaismtirnye,rMetdoicGaolveCorlnlmeegne,t,CalBceuntgtaal ,

Member of the Indigenous Drugs Committee.

;

Nerium Odorum, the sweet-scented oleander, known by the name of Karabi in this part of India and bv ICaner in Northern and

288

THE INDIAN MEDICAL GAZETTE.

[August 1901,

Western India, belongs to the Natural Order Apocynaceae, the other important poisonous species belonging to this order being Thevetia Neriifolia (yellow oleander) and Cerbera Odollam. Holarrhena Antidysenterica (Kurchi), the bark of which is considered by Indian practitioners as a specific in chronic dysentery, also belongs to this Natural Order. It grows wild almost all over India, but is much cultivated in the gardens for the sake of its flowers, white and red, considered invaluable as an offering to the deity in the Tantric form of Hindu worship. The flowers are also offered to Shiva and other Hindu gods and goddesses.
Description.
It is an evergreen shrub yielding a milky juice ; the plant is so common that a detailed description of its botanical characters is scarcely needed for its identification. The plant usually yields white or red flowers, about 1| inches in diameter and sweet-scented, but a yellow variety has also been described by Honorary Surgeon E. A. Morris, Tranquever, who found it growing near Seringapatam in the Mysore Province I have not seen any specimen of the yellow-flowered plant in this part of India. A short description of the leaves and roots with sketches in natural colours is given
below:?
Leaves.
Linear lanceolate ; thickly coriaceous ; accuminate ; midrib stout ; nerves numerous, slender, horizontal ; petiole very short.
Root.
Crooked, branched, ending in fine rootlets; externally pale yellowish grey ; bark not very thick, soft, consisting of two layers, the outer one being pale yellowish-grey, the inner layer is of a greenish-yellow colour. The bark can be readily peeled off by t he fingernail exposing the white central woody portion. The bark possesses a slight bitter taste succeeded by a peculiar pricking sensation in the tongue attended with numbness which usually lasts for about half an hour. The sensation is similar to the one produced on the tongue by the ethereal extract obtained by Stass' process from the fruits of the yellow oleander. The Nerium root is distinguished from the yellow oleander root by the latter possessing a very thick, succulent rootbark having no inner greenish yellow layer. The rootbark of the yellow oleander, when scraped, yields a thick milky-white sticky fluid, absent in the Nerium root. When warmed with strong hydrochloric acid, the root-bark of the yellow oleander turns blue (Warden's test), but no such color is produced in the Nerium rootbark when similarly treated.
Microscopical characters of the root.
A transverse section of the root discloses woodcells
and vessels, abundantly traversed by medullary rays which consisted of single rows of thick-walled parenchymatous cells. Drops and patches of a yellow and orange-coloured thick exudation were found deposited here and there in the woody portion of the root The outer pale yellowish-grey layer of the root-bark consisted of several layers of flattened cork cells containing drops of a colourless fluid ; the inner greenishyellow layer consisted of parenchymatous tissue of narrow cells with patches of a yellowish colour and containing small dark-coloured nodular masses. There were numerous openings of vessels in the inner layer of the bark. The cambium layer consisted of a few rows of greyish thin-walled cells. Starch cells were found
scattered both in the wood and bark of the root.

Ill the specimens I examined, I could not detect any crystals of oxalate of lime described as being present by
Mr. H. G. Greenish in the Pharmaceutical Journal of April 23, 1881, page 873. The characteristic microscopical appearance of a transverse section of the root consists in the presence of numerous medullary rays in
the woody portion running from the centre to the circumference, in the presence of yellow and orangecoloured drops of thick fluid in the wood and yellowish patches in the inner layer of the bark, as well as in the arrangement of the cork cells in the outer layer of the bark. These characters are well seen in the subjoined drawing sketched by an artist-friend of mine from a specimen prepared and mounted by me.
Medicinal uses.
Yery few preparations of the Hindu Materia Medica contain Nerium as one of their ingredients. There is, I find on enquiry, only one preparation called the Mohabiseswara Rasa containing Nerium routs in small quantities and which is administered internally for the cure of leprosy. For external application, an oil prepared by boiling roots of Nerium O.lorum and Plumbago Rosea, seeds of Embelia Ribes and cow's urine in Sesamuni oil is recommended by Sanskrit writers as a oure for eczema and other skin diseases. The fresh juice of the young loaves is described as a useful application in ophthalmia attended with copious lachrymation. A paste made of Nerium roots with water is recommended by Chakradatta as a cure for chancrous ulceration on the penis.
We find it stated in the Pharmacographia Indica that the Mahomedan physicians describe it as a most powerful resolvent and attenuant, only to be used externals ; internally it acts as a poison upon men and aninjSis. A. decoction of the root is recommended to reduce
swellings, and an oil prepared from the root-bark is
recommended in skin diseases of a scaly nature and in leprosy.
Surgeon-Major C. W. Calthorpe states that a poultice of the leaves fried in oil is applied to wounds to kill maggots.
The root of the white .flowered Nerium has an Indian reputation as being one of the best antidotes for snake poison and there prevails a strong popular belief in the virtue of this root as a repellant of snakes. It is alleged that its presence in a room is sufficient to drive away snakes.
Toxicological Notes. The plant has from very remote times been known in India to possess poisonous properties. It is one of the
seven minor poisons of the Hindu Materia Medica, the other six being Opium, Abrus Precatorius seeds, Datura, Glorios i Supeiba roots, milky juice of Calotropis Gigantea and Euphorbia Netiifolia. One of the Sanskrit names of the plant is Aswamaraka or Destroyer of horses and " it would seem from this that the poisonous roots were used for destroying horses."
All parts of the plant are poisonous. Dr. Honigbsrger was of opinion that the wild hill plant was more poisonous than the cultivated variety, and he is supported in this opinion by M Latour and Prof. E Pelikan who found by careful analysis that the wild variety contained a larger quantity of the poisonous principle. In the hills and in Western and Southern India, the root is said to be commonly used by women for suicidal purposes. The use of the Nerium root for suicidal purposes is, however, not common in Bengal ; the fruits of the yellow oleander .-ire more largely used for this purpose. During the fifteen years ending 1888, fourteen cases of Nerium poisoning were referred to the Chemical Examiner, Bombay, and eleven to the Chemical Examiner, Madras ; only two cases were dealt with by the Chemical Examiner, Bengal, during the same period.
In Bengal, the root of Nerium Odorum is used chiefly for the purpose of causing criminal abortion, it being applied locally and given internally for this purpose.

The Indian Medical Gazette, Aug. 1901.

ON THE CHEMISTRY AND TOXICOLOGY OE NERITJM ODORUM WITH A OF A NEWLY-SEPARATED ACTIVE PRINCIPLE.
By Asst.-Surgeon RAI CIIUNILAL BOSE BAHADOOR, M B., F.C.S.

DESCRIPTION

V

Nerium Odorum Leaves and White Flowers.

Nerium Odorum Red Flowers.

NNeerriiuumm OOddoorruurmo RRoooott..

NNeerriiuumm TTrraannssvveerrssee Section of the Root ((uunnddeerr tthhee microscope).

August 1901.]

CASES OF NERIUM POISONING.

289

Dr. Watt mentions that the goat appears to be able treated in the Calcutta Medical College Hospital on the

to feed on the foliage of the plant with impunity, but 3rd August 1866. The history pointed to the patient's

it proves fatal to camels and other animals. The plant taking about 180 grains of the root of white-flowered

is said to be poisonous to insects also.

Nerium for the cure of chancre and syphilitic erup-

The employment of the cure of gonorrhoea

the and

root by ignorant persons for syphilis has been attended

tions on the skin. The following symptoms ported to have developed in the case :?

were

re-

with fatal results.

Giddiness, general uneasy sensation, considerable

The use of Nerium Odorum root for homicidal purposes restlessness, vomiting, tetanic convulsions, lockjaw,

is not that

common in Bengal-
which

It may such

appear

strange cofonstthaent vmoulsucnutlaarry twmiutscchliensg.s

all over the body, rigidity The patient stated he

a plant

possesses

marked toxic pro-

perties is not largely utilized to serve the purposes of the never

lost consciousness, and that his

mind

was

quite

poisoner. The fact is that its toxic properties are not clear throughout. The man made a good recovery in 24

widely known ; most people consider it and the yellow hours under treatment.

oleander to be quite harmless, and as such largely grow (5) Accidental.?In a case of Nerium poisoning

them in compounds and gardens.

reported by Dr. Kamikshya Nath Acharya in 1866, a boy

Cases.? (1) Suicidal? The first recorded case of was given powdered bark of the root of Nerium Odoruni

Nerium poisoning was reported in 1843 by Dr. Greig of as a remedy for intermittent fever from which he was

Sitapore. It occurred on the 9th March, 1840. A man, suffering. Lockjaw and tetanic convulsions were noticed

aged about 50, took some Nerium root mixed with in this case. The boy recovered under treatment.

mustard oil to destroy himself on account of a (6) Accidental?Dr. Cleghorn in 1868 reported two

domestic quarrel. He was brought to the hospital about fatal cases of Nerium poisoning which occurred at

an hour and a half after the ingestion of the poison in an apparently iusensible condition. The principal

of^ Harriparah in the district

Murshidabad under

the following circumstances :?Three persons came to

symptoms noticed in the case were? Vomiting ; preterna- the house of a prostitute who gave them in milk the

lurally slow but regularpul&et and insensibility.

powdered root and bark of Nerium Odorum as a cure

The man was making favourable progress when, after for gonorrhoea. Soon after they became sick, vomited,

making certain exertions, be suddenly died, probably
from heart failure, about twenty-four hours after he

complained of pain in the abdomen, writhed about on the floor and became sleepy. The woman got frightened

had taken the poison. He never complained of any at the condition of these men and bolted from the house.

pain in the abdomen.

The bodies of two of the men were afterwards recovered

At the post-mortem examination small patches of

from her house, and Dr. Cleghorn made the post-mortem
examination on them. The fate of the third person

congestion with red points were discovered near both the pyloric and cardiac ends of the stomach posteriorly ;

is not known.

there were also two slight abrasions on the mucous

In one case he found engorgement of venous sinuses

membrane of the stomach. The cavities of the heart, particularly the ventricles, were filled with black fluid

of the brain ; abundant puncta sanguinea ; vessels on the exterior surface of the heart congested ; right

blood. Other organs were found healthy.

ventricle distended with dark fluid blood ; congestion
of vessels in the stomachy at its posterior surface near

(2) Suicidal?Dr. Broughton, Civil Surgeon of the greater curvature with well defined patches of

Kolhapore in the Bombay Presidency, reported a case of Nerium poisoning, which was treated in the civil

congestion near its pyloric and cardiac ends ; mucous membraue of intestine throughout of a dark colour

hospital at Kolhapore in August 1858. The history pointed to an attempt at suicide by swallowing a little

with very distinct large veins ; a large patch of conin the duodenum ; spots of congestion scatter-

more than an ounce of the expressed juice of Nerium

gestion ed in the jejunuiu and ileum ; large patches of conges-

(it is not stated whether the juice was expressed from the leaves or bark). He fell senseless within live

tion in the sigmoid flexure y large vessels of the liver congested the kidneys were intensely congested.

minutes and was removed to the hospital. The following symptoms were noticed in the hospital : Face

;
In the other case, the brain, the lungs, the intestines

and eyes flushed, head hot and perspiring, breathing stertorous, " foaming at the mouth," violent spasmodic

and the kidneys were reported to be healthy. There
were two ounces of serum in the pericardial sac ; both

contractions of the muscles of the entire body, but more

the ventricles of the heart were filled with fluid blood ;

marked in the superior than in the inferior extremities and also more developed on the left than on the right

the stomach bore well marked specks of stellate congestion ; there were also spots of congestion on the anterior

side. During the intervals of the spasms, the patient
There were

and posterior surfaces of the peritonial coat of the stomach, covering its cardiac end.

lay flat upon his back.

insensibility, quick

thready pulse, involuntary passing^ of greenish watery

(7) Dr. Murray reported a case of Nerium poisoning

stools, and collapse. After thirty-six hours reaction was

in the September number of the Indian Medical Gazette,

established, spasms ceased, but insensibility remained as

1877. A native male, aged about 35, took a strain-

before. He regained his speec i and senses after forty-

ed watery decoction of four ounces of the Nerium root.

eight hours. The man recoveied.

Soon after taking the poison, he was attacked with

(3) Accidental.?In the British and Foreign Medical

vomiting and cramps, and in two or three hours

and Chirurgical Review, i860, Maschka related the case of a boy who ate two handfuls (?) of Nerium oleander.

he became insensible. The following symptoms were noticed eight hours after the ingestion of the poison

The effects commenced in ten minutes; the child was

: -Insensibility ; skin cold and clammy ; pulse

uneasy and vomited. In six hours a sleepy condition

the skin

the

weak and thready; muscles of the jaws stiff; eyes turned whites only visible ; hands pretty open, but

came on; the face was pale,

cold,

contracted, and the pulse slow and regular.

pupils
After the

up,
fingers rigid, thumbs turned inward ; frequent convul-

sickness, the boy woke up, but again fell asleep, and this

occurred

coffee was given, which appeared to

sive spasms. The end of the case^ is not known as the friends of the patient removed him from the hospital

frequently ; do good. The pulse was intermittent. On the following

while he was still in an insensible condition. The

day, the child was still ill, with an intermittent pulse,

motive for the administration of the poison is not

frequent vomiting, feebleness, sleeplessness and dilatation of the pupil; there was no diarrhoea (Blythe on

mentioned in Lyon's book on Medical Jurisprudence from which the above notes have been compiled.

Poisons, p. 435.)

(8) Accidental.- In December 1897, a case of poison-

(4) Accidental, -Dr. Dwarka Nath Mukerjee reported

ing by Nerium root was successfully treated in the

a case of Nerium poisoning,

was admitted to and

Calcutta Medical College Hospital. T. am indebted to

290

THE INDIAN MEDICAL GAZETTE.

f August 1901,

Assistant-Surgeon Satya Saran Chakrabutt.y, Registrar, Medical College Hospital, for supplying me with the
notes of the case.
A man, aged 35 years, by profession a Palwan (wrestler), took a quantity of Nerium bark for the relief of cough. On admission, he was found unconscious, with small extremely feeble and slow pulse, 30 per minute ; respirations quick ; occasional convulsions ; putting out of the tongue, and inability to speak. Strychnine and ether were injected hypodermically. Pulse was better half an hour after the injection, 92 per minute ; respirations 52 per minute. 30 grains of zinc sulphate were introduced through a nasal tube, as the stomach pump could not be introduced by the mouth owing to violent convulsions, after which there was nausea but no actual vomiting. Two hours after admission, the patient was found perspiring, getting spasms all over his body, laboured respirations (44 per minute), pulse irregular and small (about 90 per minute), heartsounds irregular. About five hours after admission, 14 oz*. of urine were drawn off by a catheter. The urine was free from albumem. There was an irregular rise and fall in the pulse rate ranging between 35 and 60 per minute, and at times becoming intermittent, for several hours. About twelve hours after admission, the patient's condition grew worse, had difficulty of breathing, extremities cold, unconscious, getting spasms, pulse feeble and slow. Ether was hypodermically injected and hot bottles applied to the extremities. He continued in this condition for nearly six hours after which he recovered gradually, the puls^ rose to 80, and the respirations came down to 20. His consciousness returned. He was discharged cured on the 4th day
after admission.
(9) Accidental.?In November 1898, two cases of Nerium poisoning were treated in the Calcutta Police Hospital under Major J. B. Gibbons, i.m.s., and were reported in the April number of the Indian Medical Gazette, 1899, by Assistant-Surgeon Kali Mohan Sen who was in charge of the cases.
The cases were admitted into the hospital on the 24th November 1898, at about 10 A m. The liistory pointed to each having taken a cupful of a strong decoction of the Nerium root at about 7 a.m. for the cure of pain in the loins from which b-th of them had been suffering.
(A) Mahomedan male, aged about 50. Vomited several times before and after coming to tlie hospital ; vomited matter consisted of yellowish frothy fluid. At the time of admission he was quite conscious and able to speak and swallow ; complained of no pain in the stomach ; pulse small, soft, slow (about GO per minute) but regular ; respirations normal ; eyes congested; pupils unequal, the right one being con-
tracted.
Two hours after admission, drowsiness and twitchings of the muscles of the hands were noticed. An hour after, spasms were noticed, most marked in the upper extremities and faco but slight in the legs. There was no lockjaw but dysphagia wan a marked symptom, and the patient was unable to speak, although he appeared to understand when spoken to and frequently smiled vacantly. Respirations were hurried, and the pulse slow and small, about 50 per minute.
Four hours after admission, he began to get tonic convulsions of all the muscles of the body, especially of the upper extremities ; no lockjaw. An hour after t.lie whole body was found rigid, and there were lockjaw, twitchings of the fingers and bending of the neck towards the right ; froth coming out from the mouth. The pulse was frequent (about 100 per minute), and the respirations hurried (about 70 per minute).
About 12 hours after admission, the upper extremities were found still rigid, but the lower extremities were flaccid ; breathing was hurried and stertorous, and the pulse was frequent and small.

Rigidity of the muscles began to disappear gradually, but the general condition of the patient became worse. The pulse began to fail, the breathing continued stertorous, and the conjunctival reflex was lost. The patient died about 26 hours after the ingestion of the poison.
Post-mortem appearances.?Dr. Gibbons held a postmortem examination on the body about four hours after death and recorded the following conditions:
"Rigor mortis well marked; body still warm to the touch. Right pupil a little smaller than the left. Thumbs resting against fingers. Lungs, adherent behind and very congested witli fluid blood. Heart, right side full witli blood, lift side nearly empty; spots of subendocardial hemorrhage on front wall and towards apex on both walls. Liver, spleen, and kidneys congested. Stomach contents, about 1| oz. of greenish-yellow fluid and much mucus, no smell ; stomach in folds with tops congested, mucous membrane congested, specially along the lesser curvature. Small intestine contents, yellow mucus, slight congestion of upper part of duodenum and a few scattered spots of congestion. Large intestine healthy, contained liquid fieces. Brain healthy. Trachea congested, and frothy liquid in the bronchi.
(B) Mahomedan male, about 28 years of age. The symptoms in this case were similar to those in the first case, excepting that they were apparently of a comparatively mild nature : there were vomiting, slow and feeble pulse, hurried respirations, twitchings of the muscles of the upper exireinities, which, however, developed about twelve hours after the ingestion of the poison as against five hours in the first case ; unequal dilatation of the pupils; bending of the head towards the right; general tonic convulsions of the whole body, opisthotonos ; lockjaw. A movement of the head from side to side was noticed, a- d th?'re was a slight rise of temperature on the second day of poisoning. Under treatment he began to improve steadily, but remained in a debilitated condition for about three weeks, after which he was discharged from the hospital qured.
The treatment in both the cases consisted in giving emetics and alcoholic and diffusible stimulants, mustard plaste: s over the heart and hypodermic injections of sulphuric ether.
The viscera of the deceased and the vomited matter of both the persons were sent to the Chemical Examiner, Bengal, for analysis. A narcotico-irritant principle was detected both in the viscera and in the vomited ma' ter which produced vomiting, weakness of the heart, general uneasiness and drowsiness in a cat, but not twitchings or convulsions. The poisonous principle could not be identified.
Remarks.?From the study of the above-mentioned cases and from the action of the poison on cats ('vide Chemical Notes), the symptoms and the post-mortem appearances one may expect to find in a case of Nerium poisoning, may be generalised as follows :
A. Symptoms.?Vomiting ; general uneasiness and restlessness ; frothy salivation; slow and feeble condition of the pulse ; hurried respirations, sometimes stertorous; twitchings of the muscles of the extremities, specially marked in the upper ones and more developed 011 one side than 011 the other ; rigidity of the voluntary muscles; tetanic spasms of the whole body, sometimes opisthotonos; frequently lockjaw; drowsiness passing into insensibility ; collapse. Diarrhoea usually absent.
B. Post mortem appearances.?Patches of congestion in the stomach and upper portion of the small intestine; congestion of the liver, lungs and kidneys ; engorgement of the general venous system ; both sides of the
heart full of blood.

