anailemin in tropical macrocytic ANAEMIA
To the Editor, The Indian Medical Gazette Sir,?In a paper entitled ' Anahaemin in Tropical Macrocytic Anaemia' published in your July issue of this year, Napier and others refer to my review of the work of Dr. Lucy Wills and her co-workers (1937) which showed that in the nutritional macrocytic anaemias of monkeys the more highly purified liver extracts might be less efficacious than the less purified ones. The quotation ends as follows in inverted comas, ' In the reviewer's experience no clinical evidence of this danger is at present available ' It is unfortunate that the rest of the quotation was not given in the paper and that it was not made plain that my remarks referred to Addisonian pernicious anaemia and not to tropical macrocytic anaemia. The insertion of the remaining lines of my review in the 1938 Medical Annual makes this plain, for it continues?'Since, the improvement in the blood and central nervous system changes of his patients with pernicious anaemia has been as great and as quickly and easily produced with the recent highly purified preparation anahaemin as with the less purified preparation campolon'. This is the opinion also of Murphy of Boston who uses the highly purified extract made by the Lederle Company in 1 c.c. doses, and by Ungley of Newcastle and other leading haematologists in this country. This statement does not deny the possibility that the less highly

710

THE INDIAN MEDICAL GAZETTE

[Nov., 1938

purified preparations might he more efficacious in tropical macrocytic anaemia.
Dr. Napier is working on a very valuable problem in trying to separate the large group of tropical macrocytic anaemias info smaller divisions by means of the therapeutic test. The difficulties are obviously great as judged by the variable and inconsistent responses which are reported in the different cases. It is difficult to compare different liver extracts with one another unless they are both used 011 a single case because of the variable response which individuals show to treatment. Another difficulty lies in reckoning what should be considered comparable doses of the different liver extracts to be tested; for instance, in case 8 conclusions are drawn in regard to the increased activity of campolon compared to anahaemin when the patient received only 2 c.c.'s of anahaemin as compared to 20 c.c.'s of campolon. Probably the same criticism is applicable to case 9, but unfortunately the number of days on which 4 c.c.'s of campolon was given is not stated.
Lastly, I would draw attention to the fact that batches of anahaemin were placed on the market last year which were of low potency. Some of our cases of pernicious anaemia showed little or no response to 2 to 4 c.c.'s of anahaemin. I understand that the potency of anahaemin at present on the market is extremely high. If therefore Dr. Napier and his colleagues had been so unfortunate as to use a batch of anahaemin of
poor quality, this would be another factor in making it difficult to assess the comparative value of different liver extracts in the treatment of tropical macrocytic anaemia.

Yours, etc.,

L. S. P. DAVIDSON, b.a., m.d., M.R.C.P., F.R.C.P.E., F.R.S.E.,

Regius Professor of Medicine,

University of Aberdeen,

Practice of Medicine Department.

Forresterhill,

*
22nd

<~i

, ?7

September,

m1o9o38.

[We are very pleased to get this opportunity to apologize for what we now see to have been an unjust criticism of Professor Davidson's review of Dr. Lucy Wills' work. The apology is not on account of the incompleteness of the quotation in question; in this matter we had no intention of misleading the reader. The paper Professor Davidson was reviewing was mainly concerned with experiments in nutritional anaemia of monkeys and the arguments in this paper were mostly applied to tropical macrocytic anaemia by analogy, but what we had overlooked was that Dr. Wills and her collaborators had specifically suggested that there might be some cases of pernicious anaemia 1 which would either not respond to anahsemin or make a poor temporary response, but would respond to the cruder preparations such as campolon'. This of course makes Professor Davidson's remarks both relevant and
necessary.
Another point he raises is in connection with the different dosages. We ourselves drew attention to this weakness in our conclusions. However, other workers have shown that very much smaller doses than we gave, as low as 25 milligrammes, will produce a reticulocyte response in pernicious anaemia. We did not give more than 200 mgm. because at that time our supply of anahaemin was very limited. In case 9 to which he refers, he is correct in assuming that a large total dose of campolon was given (this is clearly shown in the chart which is drawn to scale), but the early reticulocyte response indicated that it was the first or possibly the first two injections that produced this effect.
The last point that he raised was gone into very carefully by myself personally in London when I visited the laboratories* of the manufacturers. Our supplies were obtained directly from the agents in India and there seems little chance that any of the samples were of low potency. Further, our findings have been confirmed subsequently by Drs. Wills and Evans.

The manufacturers have generously given me further larger supply of anahtnmin to continue this work. This has enabled us to give larger doses with the result that in a number of cases we have obtained a sharp response, comparable to that hitherto obtained with campolon, though we have also confirmed our previous observations regarding its failure in certain other cases, even when large doses are given.
L. E. NAPIER.l

