SvvModel 0.1660

0.0669 SvvModel 0.2697

0.0624

3. COMBINING NOVELTY AND RELEVANCE

(+16.2%) (+4.4%)

(+3.9%) (+3.8%)

For retrieved documents, the document rankings should depend on which documents the user has already seen. Suppose that we have ranked top i - 1 documents, and now we need to decide which document should be ranked at the ith position in the ranking list. The document that can deliver the most new and relevant aspects should be considered as the ith document in the ranking list. Assume that aspect novelty and aspect query-relevance are independent of each other. Then given previous ranked i - 1 documents, we rank the ith document using the following scoring function:

score(di; d1, ..., di-1) = P (N ew and Rel|di)

=

P (N ew and Rel|aj )P (aj )

aj Adi



P (N ew|aj )P (aj |Rel)

(3)

aj Adi

where aj is an aspect detected from document di, which follows Poisson distribution with an estimated rate parameter. P (N ew and Rel|aj) denotes the probability that aj is query-relevant and can provide new information as well.
P (N ew|aj) in Equation 3 states the probability of obtaining new information from aspect aj, which can be calculated using the survival models proposed in Section 2. P (N ew|aj) = 1 when i = 1. Since we do not usually have relevance information, P (aj|Rel) is unavailable. One possible solution, as introduced in [7], is to consider that
the best bet is to relate the probability of aspect aj to the conditional probability of observing aj given the query: P (aj|Rel)  P (aj|Q). P (aj|Q) can be calculated by the two-stage model presented in [9].

4. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We conduct a series of experiments to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed model on the TREC 2006 and 2007 Genomics collections. For the 2007's topics, three baseline runs are used, which are NLMinter [3], MuMshFd [8] and an Okapi run [1]. NLMinter and MuMshFd were two of the most competitive IR runs submitted to the TREC 2007 Genomics track. For 2006's topics, we test our approach on three Okapi runs. In this paper, we mainly focus on the

Table 1: Re-ranking Performance on Genomics topics
5. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we propose a survival modeling approach to promoting ranking diversity for biomedical information retrieval. The probabilistic survival model derived from the survival analysis theory measures the probability that novel information can be provided by an aspect with respect to its occurrences. Experimental results show that the proposed survival model can successfully capture the novel information delivered by aspects and achieve significant improvements on ranking diversity. We also show that combining the novelty and the relevance of a retrieved document at the aspect level is an effective way of promoting diversity of the ranked list, while keeping the relevance of retrieved documents. The proposed approach not only achieves promising performance improvements on the diversity based evaluation measure, but also on the relevance based evaluation measure.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by NSERC Discovery Grant and an Early Researher Award of Ontario.
6. REFERENCES
[1] M. Beaulieu, M. Gatford, X. Huang, S. Robertson, S. Walker, and P. William. Okapi at TREC-5. In Proc. of TREC-5, 1997.
[2] D. Cox and D. Oakes. Analysis of Survival Data. Chapman Hall. [3] D. Demner-Fushman and et. al. Combining resources to find
answers to biomedical questions. In Proc. of TREC-16, 2007. [4] A. B. Goldberg and et. al. Ranking biomedical passages for
relevance and diversity: University of Wisconsin, Madison at TREC Genomics 2006. In Proc. of TREC-15, 2006. [5] W. Hersh, A. Cohen, P. Roberts, and H. Rekapalli. TREC 2006 Genomics track overview. In Proc. of TREC-15, 2006. [6] W. Hersh, A. Cohen, L. Ruslen, and P. Roberts. TREC 2007 Genomics track overview. In Proc. of TREC-16, 2007. [7] V. Lavrenko and W. B. Croft. Relevance based language models. In Proceeding of the 24th ACM SIGIR. [8] N. Stokes and et. al. Entity-based relevance feedback for genomic list answer retrieval. In Proc. of TREC-16, 2007. [9] X. Yin, X. Huang, and Z. Li. Promoting ranking diversity for biomedical information retrieval using wikipedia. In Proc. of the 32nd ECIR, 2010.

902

Low Cost Evaluation in Information Retrieval
Ben Carterette
University of Delaware, carteret@cis.udel.edu
Evangelos Kanoulas
University of Sheffield, e.kanoulas@sheffield.ac.uk
Emine Yilmaz
Microsoft Research Cambridge, eminey@microsoft.com

Abstract:
Search corpora are growing larger and larger: over the last 10 years, the IR research community has moved from the several hundred thousand documents on the TREC disks to the tens of millions of U.S. government web pages of GOV2 to the one billion general-interest web pages in the new ClueWeb09 collection. But traditional means of acquiring relevance judgments and evaluating ­ e.g. pooling documents to calculate average precision ­ do not seem to scale well to these new large collections. They require substantially more cost in human assessments for the same reliability in evaluation; if the additional cost goes over the assessing budget, errors in evaluation are inevitable.
Some alternatives to pooling that support low-cost and reliable evaluation have recently been proposed. A number of them have already been used in TREC and other evaluation forums (TREC Million Query, Legal, Chemical, Web, Relevance Feedback Tracks, CLEF Patent IR, INEX). Evaluation via implicit user feedback (e.g. clicks) and crowdsourcing have also recently gained attention in the community. Thus it is important that the methodologies, the analysis they support, and their strengths and weaknesses are well-understood by the IR community. Furthermore, these approaches can support small research groups attempting to start investigating new tasks on new corpora with relatively low cost. Even groups that do not participate in TREC, CLEF, or other evaluation conferences can benefit from understanding how these methods work, how to use them, and what they mean as they build test collections for tasks they are interested in.
The goal of this tutorial is to provide attendees with a comprehensive overview of techniques to perform low cost (in terms of judgment effort) evaluation. A number of topics will be covered, including alternatives to pooling, evaluation measures robust to incomplete judgments, evaluating with no relevance judgments, statistical inference of evaluation metrics, inference of relevance judgments, query selection, techniques to test the reliability of the evaluation and reusability of the constructed collections.
The tutorial should be of interest to a wide range of attendees. Those new to the field will come away with a solid understanding of how low cost evaluation methods can be applied to construct inexpensive test collections and evaluate new IR technology, while those with intermediate knowledge will gain deeper insights and further understand the risks and gains of low cost evaluation. Attendees should have a basic
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR'10, July 19­23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland. ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

knowledge of the traditional evaluation framework (Cranfield) and metrics (such as average precision and nDCG), along with some basic knowledge on probability theory and statistics. More advanced concepts will be explained during the tutorial.
ACM Categories & Descriptors:
H.3.4 Information Storage and Retrieval; Performance evaluation (efficiency and effectiveness)
General Terms:
Experimentation, Measurement
Keywords:
information retrieval, evaluation, test collections
Bios
Ben Carterette is an Assistant Professor of Computer and Information Sciences at the University of Delaware, where he teaches Information Retrieval, Databases, and Artificial Intelligence. He has published extensively on constructing and using test collections for low cost. He has co-organized two SIGIR workshops on test collections that go beyond binary independent relevance judgments, and co-coordinated the TREC Million Query track from 2007­2009 as well as the TREC Session track in 2010. He is also co-organizing a SIGIR workshop on constructing the next generation of information retrieval test collections.
Evangelos Kanoulas is a postdoctoral researcher (Marie Curie fellow) in the Department of Information Studies at the University of Sheffield. He received his Ph.D. from Northeastern University. His main research interest is evaluation methods for information retrieval. He has published papers in SIGIR and CIKM. Further, Evangelos was actively involved in coordinating the Million Query Track in TREC 2007 ­ 2009 and he is one of the co-coordinators of the TREC 2010 Session Track.
Emine Yilmaz is a postdoctoral researcher in the Information Retrieval and Analysis Group at Microsoft Research Cambridge. She obtained her Ph.D. from Northeastern University. Most of her current work involves evaluation of retrieval systems, the effect of evaluation metrics on learning to rank problems and modeling user behavior. Her main interests are information retrieval and applications of information theory, statistics and machine learning. She has previously published research papers at major information retrieval venues, including SIGIR, CIKM and served as one of the organizers of the ICTIR Conference in 2009. She is also one of the organizers of a SIGIR workshop on crowdsourcing.

903

904

Learning to Rank for Information Retrieval
Tie-Yan Liu,
Microsoft Research Asia, tyliu@microsoft.com

Abstract: This tutorial is concerned with a comprehensive introduction to the research area of learning to rank for information retrieval. In the first part of the tutorial, we will introduce three major approaches to learning to rank, i.e., the pointwise, pairwise, and listwise approaches, analyze the relationship between the loss functions used in these approaches and the widely-used IR evaluation measures, evaluate the performance of these approaches on the LETOR benchmark datasets, and demonstrate how to use these approaches to solve real ranking applications. In the second part of the tutorial, we will discuss some advanced topics regarding learning to rank, such as relational ranking, diverse ranking, semi-supervised ranking, transfer ranking, query-dependent ranking, and training data preprocessing. In the third part, we will briefly mention the recent advances in statistical learning theory for ranking, which explain the generalization ability and statistical consistency of different ranking methods. In the last part, we will conclude the tutorial and show several future research directions.
ACM Categories & Descriptors: H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Retrieval models; I.2.6 [Learning]: Parameter learning.

General Terms: Algorithms, Experimentation, Theory.
Keywords: Learning to Rank, Information Retrieval, Learning Theory, Ranking Models.
Bio: Tie-Yan Liu is a lead researcher at Microsoft Research Asia. He leads a team working on learning to rank for information retrieval, and large-scale graph learning. So far, he has more than 70 quality papers published in referred conferences and journals and over 50 filed US / international patents or pending applications. He is the co-author of the Best Student Paper for SIGIR 2008, and the Most Cited Paper for the Journal of Visual Communication and Image Representation (2004~2006). He is a Program Committee Co-Chair of RIAO (2010), an Area Chair of SIGIR (2008~2010) and AIRS (2009~2010), a Co-Chair of SIGIR workshop on learning to rank for IR (2007~2009), a Co-Chair of ICML workshop on learning to rank (2010), and a Program Committee member of many other international conferences such as WWW, ICML, KDD, WSDM, and ACL. He is on the Editorial Board of the Information Retrieval Journal (IRJ), and is a guest editor of the special issue on learning to rank of IRJ. He has given tutorials on learning to rank at several conferences including SIGIR 2008, WWW 2008, and WWW 2009.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR'10, July 19­23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland. ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.
904

Estimating the Query Difficulty for Information Retrieval
David Carmel, Elad Yom-Tov
IBM Research lab in Haifa, {carmel,yomtov}@il.ibm.com

Abstract:
Many information retrieval (IR) systems suffer from a radical variance in performance when responding to users' queries. Even for systems that succeed very well on average, the quality of results returned for some of the queries is poor. Thus, it is desirable that IR systems will be able to identify "difficult" queries in order to handle them properly. Understanding why some queries are inherently more difficult than others is essential for IR, and a good answer to this important question will help search engines to reduce the variance in performance, hence better servicing their customer needs.
The high variability in query performance has driven a new research direction in the IR field on estimating the expected quality of the search results, i.e. the query difficulty, when no relevance feedback is given. Estimating the query difficulty is a significant challenge due to the numerous factors that impact retrieval performance. Many prediction methods have been proposed recently. However, as many researchers observed, the prediction quality of state-of-the-art predictors is still too low to be widely used by IR applications. The low prediction quality is due to the complexity of the task, which involves factors such as query ambiguity, missing content, and vocabulary mismatch.
The goal of this tutorial is to expose participants to the current research on query performance prediction (also known as query difficulty estimation). Participants will become familiar with states-of-the-art performance prediction methods, and with common evaluation methodologies for prediction quality. We will discuss the reasons that cause search engines to fail for some of the queries, and provide an overview of several approaches for estimating query difficulty. We then describe common methodologies for evaluating the prediction quality of those estimators, and some experiments conducted recently with their prediction quality, as measured over several TREC benchmarks. We will cover a few potential applications that can utilize query difficulty estimators by handling each query individually and selectively based on its estimated difficulty. Finally we will summarize with a discussion on open issues and challenges in the field.
ACM Categories & Descriptors:
H.3.3 [Information Search
and Retrieval]: Retrieval models

General Terms:
Algorithms, Measurement
Keywords:
Retrieval robustness, Query difficulty estimation, Performance prediction
Bio/Bios:
David Carmel is a Research Staff Member at the Information Retrieval group at IBM Haifa Research Laboratory. David earned his PhD in Computer Science from the Technion, Israel Institute of Technology in 1997. David's research is focused on search in the enterprise, query performance prediction, social search, and text mining. For several years David taught the Introduction to IR course at the CS department at Haifa University.
At IBM, David is a key contributor to IBM enterprise search offerings. David is a co-founder of the Juru search engine which provides integrated search capabilities to several IBM products, and was used as a search platform for several studies in the TREC conferences. David has published more than 60 papers in Information retrieval and Web journals and conferences, and serves in the Program Committee of many conferences (SIGIR, WWW, WSDM, CIKM, ECIR) and workshops.
Elad Yom-Tov is a Research Staff Member at the Analytics Department at the IBM Haifa Research Laboratory. The main focus of his work is research into methods for large-scale machine learning, with a recent focus on social analytics. Prior to his current position he worked at Rafael Inc., where he applied machine learning to image processing. Elad is a graduate of Tel-Aviv University (B.Sc.) and the Technion, Haifa (M.Sc. and Ph.D). He is the author (with David Stork) of the Computer Manual to accompany Pattern classification, a book and a Matlab toolbox on pattern classification.
Elad's work in Information Retrieval includes query difficulty estimation, social tagging, and novelty detection.
Both David and Elad published many papers on query performance prediction, and organized a workshop on this subject in SIGIR 2005. Their paper on learning to estimate query difficulty won the Best Paper Award at SIGIR 2005.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR'10, July 19­23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland. ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.
911

Learning Hidden Variable Models for Blog Retrieval
Mengqiu Wang
Computer Science Department Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305, USA
mengqiu@cs.stanford.edu

ABSTRACT
We describe probabilistic models that leverage individual blog post evidence to improve blog seed retrieval performances. Our model offers a intuitive and principled method to combine multiple posts in scoring a whole blog site by treating individual posts as hidden variables. When applied to the seed retrieval task, our model yields state-of-the-art results on the TREC 2007 Blog Distillation Task dataset.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Retrieval Models

General Terms
Design, Algorithms, Experimentation, Performance

Keywords
Learning to Rank, Passage Retrieval, Blog Retrieval

1. INTRODUCTION
In blog seed retrieval tasks, we are interested in finding blogs with relevant and recurring interests for given topics. Rather than ranking individual blog posts, whole sites are ranked (i.e. all posts within a blog). We propose two discriminatively trained probabilistic models that model individual posts as hidden variables.

2. PROBABILISTIC PASSAGE MODELS

We make a modeling assumption that given a set of topranked passages of a document, the document is relevant if any one of the passages is relevant.
The first independent model (IND) assumes that the relevance of a specific top-ranked passage si is independent of the relevance of any other passage in s. We use the logistic function to model the relevance of a passage. Our second model (RBM) takes a step further and exploit the correlations among individual passages in a Restricted Boltzmann Machine framework.

P (z = 0|s) = e-f(s)
1+e-f (s)

P (z^|s))

=

1 Z

exp(Pi<j

f

(si

,

sj

,

zi,

zj

)

+

P|s|
i=1

g(si

,

zi

))

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR'10, July 19­23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland. ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

where f (s) is a feature vector of the passage s, and  is
the corresponding weight vector. Z is the partition function computed by summing over all possible relevance assignments. f (si, sj, zi, zj) are passage correlation features (cosine-sim, URL overlapping) and g(si, zi) are passage relevance feature (e.g., rank, score).

3. BLOG SEED RETRIEVAL
We evaluated our models on TREC 2007 Blog Distillation Track dataset. We would first obtain top 5 ranked passages for each document using Indri's LM-based retrieval system, and then apply our model to re-rank each document. Training and testing is done by performing 5-fold cross-validation. We compare our models with four strong baselines. The first two are the Indri language model passage and document retrieval systems (Indri-psg, Indri-doc). The third one is the CMU system, which gives the best performance in TREC 2007 and 2008 evaluations [1]. The last one is the ReDDE federated search algorithm used in [2]. Our IND model showed significant improvements over the Indri passage and document retrieval baselines (58.5% and 9.4% relative improvements). The RBM model gained a small improvement over the IND model, and significantly outperformed the baseline CMU and ReDDE models.

Baseline

This work

Indri-psg 0.2267

IND

0.3596

Indri-doc 0.3284

RBM

0.3702

CMU 0.3385 RBM+cosine sim 0.3779

ReDDE 0.3150 RBM+url 0.3685

4. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we introduced two probabilistic models that model individual blog posts as hidden variables for blog seed retrieval tasks. Our models produced state-of-the-art results on TREC 2007 Blog Distillation dataset.
5. REFERENCES
[1] J. Elsas, J. Arguello, J. Callan, and J. Carbonell. Retrieval and feedback models for blog distillation. In Proceedings of TREC, 2007.
[2] J. Elsas, J. Arguello, J. Callan, and J. Carbonell. Retrieval and feedback models for blog feed search. In Proceedings of SIGIR, 2008.

922

Investigation on Smoothing and Aggregation Methods in Blog Retrieval

Mostafa Keikha
Faculty of Informatics, University of Lugano Lugano, Switzerland
mostafa.keikha@usi.ch

ABSTRACT
Recently, user generated data is growing rapidly and becoming one of the most important source of information in the web. Blogosphere (the collection of blogs on the web) is one of the main source of information in this category. In my work for my PhD, I mainly focussed on the blog distillation task which is: given a user query find the blogs that are most related to the query topic [3].
There are some properties of blogs that make blog analysis different from usual text analysis. One of these properties is related to the time stamp assigned to each post; it is possible that the topics of a blog change over the time and this can affect blog relevance to the query. Also each post in a blog can have viewer generated comments that can change the relevance of the blog to the query if these are considered as part of the content of the blog. Another property is related to the meaning of the links between blogs which are different than links between websites. Finally, blog distillation is different from traditional ad-hoc search since the retrieval unit is a blog (a collection of posts), instead of a single document. With this view, blog distillation is similar to the task of resource selection in federated search [1].
Researchers have applied different methods from similar problems to blog distillation like ad-hoc search methods, expert search algorithms or methods from resource selection in distributed information retrieval.
Based on our preliminary experiments, I decided to divide the blog distillation problem into two sub-problems. First of all, I want to use mentioned properties of blogs to retrieve the most relevant posts for a given query. This part is very similar to the ad hoc retrieval. After that, I want to aggregate relevance of posts in each blog and calculate relevance of the blog. This part requires the development of a crossmodal aggregation model that combines the different blog relevance clues found in the blogosphere.
We use structure based smoothing methods for improving posts retrieval. The idea behind these smoothing methods is to change the score of a document based on the score of its similar or related documents. We model the blogosphere as a single graph that represents relations between posts and terms [2]. The idea is that in accordance with the Clustering Hypothesis, related documents should have similar scores for the same query. To model the relatedness between posts, we
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR'10, July 19­23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

define a new measure which takes into account both content similarity and temporal distance.
In more recent work, in the aggregation part of the problem, we model each post as evidence about relevance of a blog to the query, and use aggregation methods like Ordered Weighted Averaging operators to combine the evidence. The ordered weighted averaging operator, commonly called OWA operator, was introduced by Yager [4]. OWA provides a parametrized class of mean type aggregation operators, that can generate OR operator (M ax), AN D operator (M in) and any other aggregation operator between them.
For the next steps, I'm thinking about capturing the temporal properties of the blogs. Bloggers can change their interests over the time or write about different topics periodically. Capturing these changes and using them in the retrieval is one the future woks that I'm interested in. Also, studying the relations between blogs and news and their effect on each other is an interesting problem.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search and Retrieval
General Terms
Algorithms
Keywords
Blog search, Temporal analysis, User generated data.
1. REFERENCES
[1] J. L. Elsas, J. Arguello, J. Callan, and J. G. Carbonell. Retrieval and feedback models for blog feed search. In SIGIR, pages 347­354, 2008.
[2] M. Keikha, M. J. Carman, and F. Crestani. Blog distillation using random walks. In SIGIR, pages 638­639, 2009.
[3] I. Ounis, M. De Rijke, C. Macdonald, G. Mishne, and I. Soboroff. Overview of the TREC-2006 blog track. In Proceedings of TREC, pages 15­27, 2006.
[4] R. Yager. On ordered weighted averaging aggregation operators in multicriteria decision making. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern., 18(1):183­190, 1988.

923

A Joint Probabilistic Classification Model for Resource Selection


Dzung Hong , Luo Si
Department of Computer Science Purdue University
250 N. University Street West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA
{dthong, lsi}@cs.purdue.edu

Paul Bracke, Michael Witt
Purdue University Libraries Purdue University
504 West State Street West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA
{pbracke,mwitt}@purdue.edu

Tim Juchcinski
Department of Computer Science Purdue University
250 N. University Street West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA
tjuchcin@purdue.edu

ABSTRACT
Resource selection is an important task in Federated Search to select a small number of most relevant information sources. Current resource selection algorithms such as GlOSS, CORI, ReDDE, Geometric Average and the recent classificationbased method focus on the evidence of individual information sources to determine the relevance of available sources. Current algorithms do not model the important relationship information among individual sources. For example, an information source tends to be relevant to a user query if it is similar to another source with high probability of being relevant. This paper proposes a joint probabilistic classification model for resource selection. The model estimates the probability of relevance of information sources in a joint manner by considering both the evidence of individual sources and their relationship. An extensive set of experiments have been conducted on several datasets to demonstrate the advantage of the proposed model.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search and Retrieval
General Terms
Algorithms, Design, Performance
Keywords
Federated Search, Resource Selection, Joint Classification
1. INTRODUCTION
Federated text search provides a unified search interface for multiple search engines of distributed text information sources. There are three major research problems in federated search as resource representation, resource selection
Vietnam Education Foundation Fellow
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. SIGIR'10, July 19­23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland. Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07 ...$10.00.

and results merging. This paper focuses on resource selection, which selects a small number of most relevant information sources to search for any particular user query.
Resource selection for federated search has been a popular research topic in the last two decades. Many methods treat each information source as a single big document and rank available sources either by using statistics from the sample documents (CORI [6]), or by building a language model for each source (Xu and Croft [27], Si and Callan [22]). Other methods such as GlOSS [12], Geometric Average [17], ReDDE [20], CRCS [18] and SUSHI [24] look further inside an information source by estimating the relevance of each document and calculate the source's score as an aggregate function of the documents that the source contains. More recent methods such as the classification-based method [1] and the work in [2] treat resource selection as a classification problem and build probabilistic models by combining multiple types of evidence of individual sources.
Existing resource selection methods judge an information source by its own characteristics, but miss an important piece of evidence, which is the relationship between available sources. In practice, we notice that relationship can be meaningful and indicative. An information source that is "similar" to another highly relevant source has a better chance of being relevant. The evidence of source relationship can be very valuable for real world federated search solutions. In particular, the resource representation (e.g., sample documents) of each information source is often limited and prevents resource selection algorithms from identifying relevant sources, while the relationship between sources can help to alleviate the problem by providing more evidence from similar sources. Our study of a real world federated search application with digital libraries also suggests that it is difficult to obtain thorough resource representation from many sources (i.e., digital libraries). For example, some sources may only provide the abstracts of its documents instead of the full texts.
This paper proposes a novel probabilistic discriminative model for resource selection that explicitly models the relationship between information sources. In particular, the new research combines both the evidence of individual sources and the relationship evidence between sources into a single probabilistic model for estimating the joint probability of relevance of a set of sources. Different similarity metrics have been studied to explore the relationship between information sources. An extensive set of experiments have been conducted on two TREC testbeds for federated search

98

research and one real world application for searching digital libraries. The experiment results demonstrate the effectiveness and robustness of the proposed resource selection algorithm with the joint classification model.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: the next section discusses the related research work. Section 3 presents the classification model for resource selection. Section 4 proposes the joint classification model. Section 5 discusses experimental methodology. Section 6 presents experimental results and related discussions. Section 7 concludes and points out some future research work.
2. RELATED WORK
There has been considerable research on all of the three subtasks of federated search as resource representation, resource selection and results merging. Since this paper focuses on the resource selection task, we mainly survey most related prior research work in resource selection and briefly talk about resource representation and results merging.
The first step in federated search is to obtain representative resource descriptions from available information sources. The START protocol [11] provides accurate information in collaborative federated search environments, but it does not work for uncooperative environments. On other side, the query-based sampling technique [4] has been widely used in federated search to obtain sample documents from each source by issuing randomly generated queries. In particular, the query-based sampling approach is used in this work to acquire sample documents from available sources. After that, all sample documents are merged together as a centralized sample database.
Resource selection selects a small set of most relevant sources for each user query [3][8][13]. Most early resource selection algorithms treat each individual source as a single big document which they extract summary statistics from. Those big document methods such as KL [27], CORI [6], and CVV [28] utilize different types of summary statistics of sources and finally rank available sources by matching the statistics with the user's query. These methods ignore the boundaries of individual documents within individual sources, which limits their performance of identifying sources with a large number of relevant documents.
Some recent resource selection algorithms such as ReDDE [20], DTF [9][10], CRCS [18] and SUSHI [24] step away from treating each source as a single big document. Those algorithms often analyze individual sample documents within resource representation for ranking sources. For example, the ReDDE selection algorithm estimates the distribution of relevant documents by treating top-ranked sample documents as a representative subset of relevant documents in available sources. Related algorithms such as UUM [22], RUM [23] and CRCS [18] have been proposed, which use different methods to weight top-ranked documents and estimate the probability of relevance.
More recent resource selection algorithms such as the classification-based resource selection in federated search [1] or vertical search [2] treat resource selection as a classification problem. A classification model can be learned from a set of training queries and is used to predict the relevance of a source for test queries. It has been shown [1] that the classification approach can outperform state-of-the-art resource selection algorithms like ReDDE.
Existing resource selection methods utilize evidence within

individual sources to judge their relevance but ignore the evidence of the relationship between available sources. However, the relationship evidence is a valuable piece of information, which promises to improve the accuracy of resource selection.
Two other related research work in [25][7] learn from the results of past queries for resource selection. However, these two methods do not model the relationship between information sources and do not use formal models based on classification.
The last step of federated search is results merging, which merges returned documents from selected sources into a single list. The most effective method is to download and recalculate scores for all returned documents within a centralized retrieval model, but this is often inefficient. More efficient methods such as the CORI merging formula, the SSL [21] and the SAFE merging algorithms [19] try to approximate the results of centralized retrieval in different ways.
3. CLASSIFICATION MODEL
3.1 Classification Approach
Many resource selection algorithms are unsupervised and provide one source of evidence. To combine different evidence in a unified framework, one needs a training dataset, usually in the form of binary judgments on sources. Specifically, given a set of sources C and a set of training queries Q, the objective is to find a mapping F of the form
F : Q × C  {+1, -1}
where +1 indicates the relevance between the query and the source, and -1 indicates irrelevance.
Arguello et al.[1] have proposed a method to construct those judgments. Each query q  Q will be issued to a fulldataset index for searching. A source Ci  C is considered to be relevant with q if more than  documents from Ci are present in top T of the full-dataset result. Otherwise, it is marked as irrelevant.
While this method can produce a rank list that mimics the rank list produced by a full-dataset retrieval, it is difficult to apply in a real world environment because of the absence of a full-dataset. We propose an alternative method that could be more feasible. A query q is now issued to each remote source Ci and we only count their returned documents that are relevant. Top T documents from each source will be inspected, then a source is marked as relevant if it has more than  relevant documents presenting in that list. In our work, we set T = 100. For dataset with a large average number of relevant documents per query (over 100), we set  = 3; otherwise  is equal to 1.
3.2 Sources of Evidence
This section presents different types of evidence of individual sources for building our classification model.
3.2.1 Big Document
Big Document (BIGDOC) approach treats each information source as a big document that contains all of its sample documents. A query is then issued to an index which contains a set of big documents, each representing one source. Sources are then ranked by how their merged sample documents match the query. The disadvantage of this method is that it does not take into account the variation of sources'

99

sizes. Assuming that the sampling process is uniform, for a very big source, the sampling process only covers a small fraction of its documents. Therefore, it may present fewer relevant documents in the centralized sample database than a much smaller one, although the absolute number of relevant documents in the big source is higher. Without considering the sources' sizes, it would be misleading to conclude that the small source is the better choice. Nevertheless, when combined with other features, BIGDOC could have a good contribution, especially in the case that many sources contain roughly the same number of documents. While CORI (discussed in the next part) also treats each source as one document, BIGDOC approach is more flexible since it can be used with different retrieval algorithms. In our experiments, the algorithm is Indri [14]. For each pair of a query and a source, one BIGDOC feature is built from the sample documents.

3.2.2 CORI
The CORI resource selection algorithm [6] uses Bayesian Inference Network model to rank sources. The belief P (q|Ci) that a source Ci satisfies query q is the combination of multiple P (rj|Ci), the belief corresponding to each term rj of query q. CORI applies a variant of tf.idf formula to determine each P (rj|Ci) and combine them together to calculate the final belief score of each source. CORI was proven to have robust performance for resource selection. In our experiments, one CORI feature is used for each pair of a query and a source.

3.2.3 Geometric Average

In this method, a query is first issued to a centralized sample database, which was mentioned in section 2. Then, each source Ci is scored according to the geometric average query likelihood of its top K sample documents [17],

K

1 K

GAV Gq(Ci) =

P (q|dij )

j=1

where dij is the j-th sample document in the rank list of source Ci. If Ci presents less than K documents in the rank list, the product above is padded with the minimum query likelihood score.

3.2.4 Modified ReDDE & ReDDE.top
Recall that ReDDE score [20] is calculated according to :

ReDDEq (Ci )

=

Niest Nisamp



×

I (d

dRsNamp



Ci) × Pq(rel|d)

where RsNamp is the top N documents returned from searching the centralized sample database. Niest is the estimated size of source Ci, Nisamp is the sample size of Ci, and I(.) is the indicator function. The number of top returned documents, N , is equal to  × Naelslt, where Naelslt is the estimated total number of documents of all sources and  is a constant,
which is usually in the range 0.002-0.005.
ReDDE uses a step function to estimate Pq(rel|d), the probability that the document d is relevant to query q. For
all top N documents, that probability is equal to a constant.
In our experiment, we use a modified version of ReDDE,
which replaces Pq(rel|d) by P (q|d), the retrieval score of document d with respect to query q. The Indri retrieval

algorithm [14] is used for searching the centralized sample database. The modified ReDDE feature has been shown empirically better than the original ReDDE feature. There is one modified ReDDE feature for each pair of a query and a source.
ReDDE.top [1] is another variant of ReDDE. Unlike ReDDE, ReDDE.top set a specific number to N . In our experiment, we add another two ReDDE.top features with N = 100 and N = 1000 respectively.

4. JOINT CLASSIFICATION MODEL

4.1 Probabilistic Discriminative Model
We propose a novel joint probabilistic model for the resource selection task. First of all, a logistic model is built to combine all the features of individual sources. We refer to this model as the independent model (Ind).
Let v = {v1, ..., vn} be the relevance vector. vi = 1 indicates that the i-th source is relevant, otherwise vi = 0. The relevance probability of a source ci given its feature vector f(ci) is calculated as:

P (vi

=

1|ci)

=

1

exp(f(ci) · ) + exp(f(ci) · )

where  denotes the combination weight vector. For simplicity, the vector f(ci) contains the bias feature (which is 1 for every pair of a query and a source) and the weight vector
contains the bias element 0. The conditional probability of v given n sources is:

P (v|c)

=

1 Z

n exp

log P

(vi

=

1|ci)vi P (vi

=

0|ci)1-vi

i

where Z is the normalizing constant. Our joint classification model (Jnt) expands the above
formula with a new term to model the relationship between sources. The conditional probability of v given n sources is now:

P (v|c)

=

1 Z

n exp

log P (vi

=

1|ci)vi P (vi

=

0|ci)1-vi

+

|v|

i


sim(ci, cj )vivj

i,j(i<j)

which can be rewritten as:

P (v|c)

=

1 Z

n exp

(1

-

vi

)(f(ci)

·

)

-

log(1

+

exp(f(ci)

·

))

+

|v|

i


sim(ci, cj )vivj

i,j(i<j)

where sim(ci, cj) denotes the similarity between two sources ci and cj, and Z is another normalizing constant.
The parameter  controls the influence of similarity. If || is high, the model tends to promote only similar (or dissimilar) sources. When  = 0, we get back to the independent model.
In the learning step, we learn the feature weight vector  from the independent model by using logistic regression. This vector is then used in the joint model. Learning , however, is generally intractable. One can see that the space of vector v is 2n, and so inferencing and estimation become

100

impossible when n is large. We resolve this issue by first ranking the sources using the independent model, and then apply the joint classification model only to the top K = 10 sources. This is equivalent to reranking the top K sources.
From the set of training queries, we use maximum loglikelihood estimation to learn the parameter . Because there is no closed-form solution for the maximum of this loglikelihood function, gradient search method is used instead.
In the prediction step, for a test query, the score of each source ci is assigned by its probability of being relevant:
R(ci) = P (vi = 1|c) = P (v1, v2, ..., vi = 1, ..., vn|c)
v\vi
where v\vi denotes the set of variables in v with variable vi omitted. In practice, the summation is taken over K - 1 variables and so is feasible when K is small. After that, the top K sources will be reranked according to the new score.
4.2 Similarity Metrics

4.2.1 Similarity Metric based-on Evaluation
Given a set of training queries, the similarity between two sources can be measured by looking at the set of queries for wich they are both relevant. The bigger that set is, the more related they are. Specifically, we apply a cross-product formula to measure this metric:
SM E(ci, cj) = rel(ci, q)rel(cj, q)
qQ
where Q is the set of training queries, rel(ci, q) is equal to 1 if source ci is relevant to query q based on the classification approach described above, otherwise it is 0. This method is called Similarity Metric based-on Evaluation (SME).

4.2.2 Similarity Metric based-on Query-specific
Evaluation
One issue with the SME is that it is independent of the query. A source may be highly related with another source with respect to a query but unrelated with that source with respect to another query. Therefore, it is better to incorporate the similarity between queries into this formula. By extending the above SME, we derive another metric called Similarity Metric based on Query-specific Evaluation (SMQE).



SM QEq(ci, cj ) =

sim(q, q)rel(ci, q)rel(cj , q)

q Q

where sim(q, q) denotes the correlation (or similarity) between the test query q and a training query q. There are many studies that explore the topicality or classification of queries, however, in this paper, we choose one simple approach. A query in consideration is issued to the centralized sample database, and the number of documents from each source that appear in top M documents of the result is recorded. In our work, M is equal to 100. The correlation between two queries is derived by a cosine-like formula:

sim(q, q)

=




i

numdoc(q,

ci)numdoc(q



,

ci

)

i numdoc(q, ci)2 i numdoc(q, ci)2

where numdoc(q, ci) is the number of documents of source ci that appear in the top M documents returned from query q.

Both the SME and SMQE metrics can be modified in many ways. First of all, the term rel(i, q) can be represented either by a binary number or the absolute number of relevant documents. Or we can set different thresholds to the searching on the centralized sample database. Another choice is to normalize the relevance vector. However, in our experiments, those changes do not have much effect on the results. In fact, SMQE provides the best result, proving that it better reflects the relationship between sources.
4.2.3 Similarity-Metric based-on Kullback-Leibler
divergence
This method tries to reveal the similarity between sources by looking at their own vocabularies. Specifically, a language model [16] is built for each sample source. Then we calculate the Kullback-Leibler divergence between those two language models. Recall that the Kullback-Leibler divergence is actually the distance between two probabilistic models, which is the inverse of their similarity. However, because our model can adapt this change by inferring a negative similarity coefficient , we keep the KL-value as it is. This metric is referred to as SMKL.
5. EXPERIMENTAL METHODOLOGY
We evaluate our proposed algorithms on 3 datasets. The first two datasets are well-known TREC testbeds, the last one comes from a real world application.
· TREC123-100col-bysource (TREC123): 100 collections (information sources) were created from TREC CDs 1,2 and 3 [3]. They are organized by publication source and publication date. The size of each source varies from 7,000 to 39,700 documents (see Table 1 for more statistics). This testbed comes with 100 queries (TREC topics 51-150) with judgments.
· TREC4-100col-bysource (TREC4): 100 collections were created according to the publication source of documents in TREC4 [26]. One actual publication source is distributed across a number of information sources depending on its total number of documents. Each information source has roughly 5,675 documents. This testbed comes with 50 queries (TREC topics 201250) with judgments. More statistics about both TREC123 and TREC4 are presented in Table 1.
· Digital Library (DIGLIB): This real world dataset contains 80 sources (i.e., digital libraries) that are accessible from Purdue University Libraries1. This testbed presents a heterogeneous sources of information. Each document from those sources composes of many fields. Three fields that convey rich information are the abstract, subject heading (or document's category) and full text. Not all sources provide all those three fields. A document from one source may not be provided with its full text, while a document from another source may not have the subject heading. Table 2 shows that only 65% of 80 sources provide abstracts, 65% provide subject headings, and only 30% provide full texts. In our current work, we temporally merge all those available information into one document. Future research may
1We make the dataset available as feature file at http://www.cs.purdue.edu/homes/dthong/

101

Table 1: Summary Statistics of TREC123 and TREC4

Testbed
TREC123 TREC4

Size (GB)
3.2 2.0

Number of Documents (x1000) Min Avg Max 0.7 10.8 39.7 5.6 5.6 5.6

Size(MB)
Min Avg Max 28 32 42 4 20 138

Rk

=

k ki=1
i=1

Ei Bi

Let Ei denote the number of relevant documents of the i-th source according to the ranking E, Bi denote the same thing with respect to ranking B. We also report the results at P @{1, 3, 5, 10} as in source level accuracy.

Table 2: Statistical Information about DIGLIB: Number of Sources Corresponding to their Available Information Fields
Abstract Subject Full Text Number of Sources 52(65%) 52(65%) 24(30%)

· Document Level, High Precision: To make it independent from result merging algorithm, we use fulldataset retrieval as our merging method. The chosen retrieval algorithm is Inquery in Lemur Toolkit [5]. For each query, top 5 sources from the joint classification rank list are selected for this step. Documents not from selected sources are filtered out from the full-dataset rank list. The remaining list is checked by their precision at P @{5, 10, 15, 20, 30} accordingly. We also report a full-dataset precision which includes all sources.

consider to treat each source differently according the type of information that is available.
We also build a set of 100 queries, some of them are extracted from the library log, which are real queries. For each pair of a query and a source, we manually assign a binary value to indicate their relevance.

On TREC123 and TREC4, all tests at different levels are presented. On DIGLIB dataset, we only report the results at source level because the document judgments are difficult to make as many sources do not provide their full text information. In most of the experiments, SMQE is used as our default similarity metric. However, in section 6.4, we also discuss the experimental results with different other metrics.

A note on resource specific retrieval algorithm: DIGLIB is a real world application of digital libraries, each of its sources implements a different retrieval algorithm, which is not known. We can only access those sources through a unified interface. For TREC123 and TREC4, we assign one retrieval algorithm to each source in a round-robin manner. The set of assigned algorithms is Inquery, Language Model and Vector Space (tf.idf). These algorithms influence the query-based sampling process, as well as the classification process. A less effective retrieval algorithm like Vector Space model may reduce a source's chance of being marked as relevant.
For each testbed, we repeat every experiment 5 times. In each trial, we randomly select 50% of the queries as training set, and test on the other 50%. All the results shown in the next section are averaged over 5 trials.
Each source is sampled with 300 documents. We also compare the main results with 100 sample documents. The experiments are measured on several levels:
· Source Level (Resource Selection), Accuracy: This level measures the precision of the resource selection algorithms. Top sources (i.e., top 10) are judged by their precisions at different levels. The judgments come from the classification method, as described in section 3.1. We report the results at P @{1, 3, 5, 10} accordingly.
· Source Level, Recall Metric (R-metric): This metric is widely used in comparing resource selection algorithms [3]. Let E denote the ranking produced by a resource selection algorithm, B denote the based line ranking, in this case, the Relevance-Based Ranking. At level k, the R-metric is defined as:

6. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In all of our experiments, we use paired t-test on queries to check significance. A  denotes a significance on p < 0.1 level;  corresponds to p < 0.05 level and  corresponds to p < 0.01 level.
6.1 TREC123 & TREC4
First of all, we compare the joint classification model with the independent model on the two TREC testbeds. Table 3 represents the source level results in accuracy on TREC123 and TREC4. The second column of each dataset is the joint classification model. Numbers in parentheses show the relative improvement of the joint classification model (denoted as "Jnt") over the independent model (denoted as "Ind").
Table 4 shows the R-metric comparison between the independent model and joint classification model. Table 5 shows the high precision at document level. We also report the full centralized retrieval, which includes all sources. This is denoted as the "Full" column in the table.
It can be seen that joint classification model always leads to better results than independent model, as it shows in all three tables. Both models have the same source level accuracy and R-metric values at top 10 because of the fact that we rerank the top 10 sources. The results are more statistically significant on TREC123 than on TREC4. This can be explained as in TREC123, we have trained on 50 queries; whereas in TREC4, we use only 25 queries out of 50 for training.
6.2 Digital Library
The result at source level of Digital Library is reported in Table 6. In this real world dataset, the joint classification model significantly outperforms the independent model. This accounts to the fact that many sources only provide

102

Table 3: Source Level Results in Accuracy on TREC123 & TREC4 with 300 Sample Documents

Table 5: Document Level Results in High Precision on TREC123 & TREC4 with 300 Sample Documents

Src Rank
@1 @3 @5 @10

TREC123

Ind 0.512 0.456 0.451 0.439

Jnt 0.524(2.3%) 0.499(9.4%) 0.484(7.3%)
0.439(0%)

TREC4

Ind 0.480 0.451 0.430 0.414

Jnt 0.536(11.7%) 0.475(5.3%) 0.446(3.7%)
0.414(0%)

Docs Rank
@5 @10 @15 @20 @30

Full 0.446 0.444 0.435 0.430 0.414

TREC123

Ind 0.392 0.355 0.332 0.309 0.280

Jnt 0.410(4.6%) 0.360(1.4%) 0.347(4.5%) 0.326(5.5%) 0.300(7.1%)

Table 4: Source Level Results in R-metric on TREC123 & TREC4 with 300 Sample Documents

Src Rank
@1 @3 @5 @10

TREC123

Ind 0.262 0.309 0.354 0.426

Jnt 0.319(21.8%) 0.364(17.8%) 0.400(13.0%)
0.426(0%)

TREC4

Ind 0.287 0.324 0.343 0.414

Jnt 0.309(7.7%) 0.340(4.9%) 0.355(3.5%)
0.414(0%)

Docs Rank
@5 @10 @15 @20 @30

Full 0.549 0.459 0.422 0.384 0.354

TREC4

Ind 0.282 0.238 0.209 0.186 0.167

Jnt 0.290(2.8%) 0.254(6.7%) 0.224(7.2%) 0.200(7.5%) 0.170(1.8%)

partial information about themselves. This also shows that the joint classification model can alleviate the problem of missing information.
6.3 Tests with Different Sample Sizes
We conduct experiments on three datasets with only 100 documents sampled from each source. This test is to show the robustness of the model, as well as the effect of sampling size on the results. The results of source level (both in accuracy and R-metric) and document level are reported for TREC123 and TREC4 (Table 7, Table 8 and Table 9 respectively), while only source level is reported for DIGLIB (Table 10).
The sample size clearly affects TREC123. Its performance of the independent model drops significantly. However, this also leaves room for joint classification model to show its effectiveness: the accuracy on source level is statistically more significant. On document level, the improvement is a bit weaker. This can be explained as the initial choice of top 10 sources from the independent model is less precise, so is the joint classification model, which uses the initial ranking list directly.
Most results on TREC4 from Table 7 to Table 9 indicate the advantage of the joint classification model against independent model with a small number of sample documents, although the difference is smaller than TREC123 due to the limited amount of training information.
The results on DIGLIB (Table 10) are also consistent. The performances of both resource selection algorithms drop with 100 sample documents. However, the results of the joint classification method are still significantly better than those of the independent method.
6.4 Test with Different Similarity Metrics
We conduct tests on three testbeds with different similarity metrics discussed in Section 4.2. Figure 1 shows the

Table 6: Source Level Results in Accuracy on DIGLIB with 300 Sample Documents

Src Rank
@1 @3 @5 @10

DIGLIB

Ind 0.552 0.460 0.419 0.356

Jnt 0.640(15.9%) 0.536(16.5%) 0.487(16.2%)
0.356(0%)

Table 7: Source Level Results in Accuracy on TREC123 & TREC4 with 100 Sample Documents

Src Rank
@1 @3 @5 @10

TREC123

Ind 0.320 0.299 0.318 0.319

Jnt 0.380(18.8%) 0.373(24.7%) 0.357(12.3%)
0.319(0%)

TREC4

Ind
0.496 0.405 0.379 0.367

Jnt 0.480(-3.2%) 0.411(1.5%) 0.403(6.3%)
0.367(0%)

Table 8: Source Level Results in R-metric on TREC123 & TREC4 with 100 Sample Documents

Src Rank
@1 @3 @5 @10

TREC123

Ind 0.183 0.214 0.244 0.311

Jnt 0.233(27.3%) 0.262(22.4%) 0.279(14.3%)
0.311(0%)

TREC4

Ind 0.278 0.264 0.293 0.341

Jnt 0.317(14%) 0.293(11%) 0.311(6.1%)
0.341(0%)

103

Table 9: Document Level Results in High Precision on TREC123 & TREC4 with 100 Sample Documents

TREC123

0.3

0.42

SMQE

SME

0.4

Independent

0.28

SMKL

TREC4
SMQE SME Independent SMKL

Docs Rank
@5 @10 @15 @20 @30

TREC123

Ind 0.328 0.302 0.288 0.277 0.253

Jnt 0.329(0.3%) 0.316(4.6%) 0.306(6.2%) 0.296(6.9%) 0.268(5.9%)

TREC4

Ind 0.283 0.243 0.223 0.195 0.165

Jnt 0.301(6.4%) 0.254(4.5%) 0.227(1.8%) 0.204(4.6%) 0.166(0.6%)

Table 10: Source Level Results in Accuracy of DIGLIB with 100 Sample Documents

Precision Precision

0.38 0.36 0.34 0.32
0.3 0.28 0.26
0

10

20

Document Rank

0.26

0.24

0.22

0.2

0.18

0.16

30

0

10

20

30

Document Rank

Src Rank
@1 @3 @5 @10

DIGLIB

Ind 0.436 0.383 0.375 0.318

Jnt 0.620(42.2%) 0.531(38.6%) 0.474(26.4%)
0.318(0%)

results of TREC123 and TREC4 at document level. From this figure, we notice that the SMQE method outperforms all other metrics, due to the fact the it considers the similarity between queries. The SME produces a quite close-to-best result, but the SMKL tends not to be a good choice for the joint classification model. On TREC4, SMKL is comparable with independent model, but it is worse than SMQE and SME.
Figure 2 shows the results of DIGLIB at source level. In this case, both SMQE and SME are comparable, except for the precision at top 1. Again SMKL is not a good choice.

Figure 1: Document Level High Precision on TREC123 & TREC4 with Different Similarity Metrics

Precision

DIGLIB

0.65

SMQE

SME

Independent

0.6

SMKL

0.55

0.5

0.45

0.4

0.35

0

2

4

6

8

10

Source Rank

7. CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK
This paper proposes a novel joint probabilistic classification model for the resource selection task in federated text search. Existing resource selection algorithms only utilize evidence of individual information sources to select relevant sources, but they do not model the valuable relationship information between the sources. The proposed algorithm estimates the probability of relevance of information sources in a joint manner by combining both the evidence of individual sources and the relationship between the sources. The importance of different types of evidence is determined in a discriminative manner for maximizing the accuracy of resource selection with some training queries. Different types of similarity metrics have been explored to model source similarity based on the performance of available sources on training queries and the Kullback-Leibler divergence on the contents of the sources. A set of experiments were conducted with two TREC datasets and one real world application with digital libraries. The empirical results in different configurations have demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed joint classification model.
There are several directions to extend the research work in the paper. First, one advantage of the proposed joint probabilistic model is to integrate different types of evidence of

Figure 2: Source Level Accuracy on DIGLIB with
Different Similarity Metrics
individual sources and their relationship. We plan to explore more features for improving the performance of resource selection. For example, we can combine multiple types of similarity evidence in a single framework (with different  weights), which may better model sources' relationship for more accurate resource selection. Second, the joint model in this paper utilizes a reranking approach in resource selection with a small set of information sources (e.g., top 10) to avoid large computational complexity. It is possible to break this limit by utilizing some other approximate inference algorithms (e.g., the pseudo likelihood approach [15]) or making further assumptions on the sources' relationship. For example, one strategy is to first divide available sources into groups of closely related sources. Inference can be conducted by building a small model in each group and assuming independence of sources between different groups.
8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was partially supported by the Vietnam Education Foundation (VEF) and the NSF grant IIS-0749462.

104

The opinions, findings, and conclusions stated herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the sponsors.
9. REFERENCES
[1] J. Arguello, J. Callan, and F. Diaz. Classification-based resource selection. Proceeding of
the 18th ACM Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, 2009. [2] J. Arguello, F. D´iaz, J. Callan, and J. Crespo. Sources of evidence for vertical selection. In Proceedings of the
32nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. ACM, 2009. [3] J. Callan. Distributed information retrieval. Advances in Information Retrieval, pages 127­150, 2000. [4] J. Callan and M. Connell. Query-based sampling of text databases. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, 19(2):97­130, 2001. [5] J. Callan, W. B. Croft, and S. M. Harding. The inquery retrieval system. In Proceedings of the Third
International Conference on Database and Expert Systems Applications, 1992. [6] J. Callan, Z. Lu, and W. B. Croft. Searching distributed collection with inference networks. In
Proceedings of the 18th Annual International ACM
SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, 1995. [7] S. Cetintas, L. Si, and H. Yuan. Learning from past queries for resource selection. In Proceeding of the 18th
ACM Conference on Information and Knowledge Management. ACM, 2009. [8] N. Craswell, P. Bailey, and D. Hawking. Server selection on the world wide web. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM Conference on Digital Libraries. ACM, 2000. [9] N. Fuhr. A decision-theoretic approach to database selection in networked ir. ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS), 17(3):229­249, 1999. [10] N. Fuhr. Resource discovery in distributed digital libraries. In In Digital Libraries '99: Advanced Methods and Technologies, Digital Collections, 1999. [11] L. Gravano, K. Chang, C-C., H. Garc´ia-Molina, and A. Paepcke. Starts: Stanford proposal for internet meta-searching. In Proceedings of the ACM-SIGMOD
International Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD). ACM, 1997. [12] L. Gravano, H. Garc´ia-Molina, and A. Tomasic. Gloss: Text-source discovery over the internet. ACM Transactions on Database Systems, 24(2):229­264, 1999. [13] W. Meng, C. Yu, and K. Liu. Building efficient and effective metasearch engines. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 34(1):48­89, 2002. [14] D. Metzler and W. Croft. Combining the language model and inference network approaches to retrieval. Information Processing and Management, 40(5):735­750, 2004. [15] S. Parise and M. Welling. Learning in markov random fields: An empirical study. In Joint Statistical Meeting (JSM2005), volume 4, 2005. [16] J. M. Ponte and W. B. Croft. A language modeling approach to information retrieval. In Proceedings of

the 25th Annual International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. ACM, 1998. [17] J. Seo and W. B. Croft. Blog site search using resource selection. In CIKM '08: Proceeding of the
17th ACM Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, pages 1053­1062, New York, NY, USA, 2008. ACM. [18] M. Shokouhi. Central-rank-based collection selection in uncooperative distributed information retrieval. In
Proceedings of the 29th European Conference on Information Retrieval, 2007. [19] M. Shokouhi and J. Zobel. Robust result merging using sample-based score estimates. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, 27(3):1­29, 2009. [20] L. Si and J. Callan. Relevant document distribution estimation method for resource selection. In
Proceedings of the 26th Annual International ACM
SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. ACM, 2003. [21] L. Si and J. Callan. A semi-supervised learning method to merge search engine results. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, 21(4):457­491, 2003. [22] L. Si and J. Callan. Unified utility maximization framework for resource selection. In Proceedings of
13th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM), 2004. [23] L. Si and J. Callan. Modeling search engine effectiveness for federated search. In Proceedings of the
28th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. ACM, 2005. [24] P. Thomas and M. Shokouhi. Sushi: scoring scaled samples for server selection. In SIGIR '09: Proceedings
of the 32nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. ACM, 2009. [25] E. Voorhees, N. K. Gupta, and B. Johnson-Laird. Learning collection fusion strategies. In Proceedings of
the 18th Annual International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. ACM, 1995. [26] J. Xu and J. Callan. Effective retrieval with distributed collections. In Proceedings of the 21st
Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. ACM, 1998. [27] J. Xu and W. B. Croft. Cluster-based language models for distributed retrieval. In Proceedings of the 22nd
Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. ACM, 1999. [28] B. Yuwono and D. L. Lee. Server ranking for distributed text retrieval systems on the internet. In
Proceedings of the 5th Annual International
Conference on Database Systems for Advanced Applications, 1997.

105


C:\Users\z3696\Documents\Document-Classification\classifier\Imbalanced_Raw.py:92: FutureWarning: The frame.append method is deprecated and will be removed from pandas in a future version. Use pandas.concat instead.
  df = df.append(pos_df)
C:\Users\z3696\Documents\Document-Classification\classifier\Imbalanced_Raw.py:93: FutureWarning: The frame.append method is deprecated and will be removed from pandas in a future version. Use pandas.concat instead.
  df = df.append(neg_df)
                                                sentence  label
0      The Importance of Anchor Text for Ad Hoc Searc...      1
1                                                             1
2                           Marijn Koolen1 Jaap Kamps1,2      1
3      1 Archives and Information Studies, University...      1
4                            {m.h.a.koolen,kamps}@uva.nl      1
...                                                  ...    ...
48516  Jacques Savoy University of Neuchatel Africa &...      0
48517                                                         0
48518                                                 iv      0
48519                                                         0
48520                                                         0

[78229 rows x 2 columns]
(29708, 2)
(48521, 2)
[nltk_data] Downloading package wordnet to
[nltk_data]     C:\Users\z3696\AppData\Roaming\nltk_data...
[nltk_data]   Package wordnet is already up-to-date!
[nltk_data] Downloading package stopwords to
[nltk_data]     C:\Users\z3696\AppData\Roaming\nltk_data...
[nltk_data]   Package stopwords is already up-to-date!
DF1: 31193
DF2: 34164
DF3: 37135
DF4: 40106
DF5: 40056
DF6: 38173
DF7: 36292
DF8: 34411
DF9: 32530
DF10: 30649
15596
17082
18568
20053
20028
19086
18146
17206
16265
15324
X1: (15596,)
X2: (15596,)
X3: (17082,)
X4: (17082,)
X5: (18568,)
X6: (18568,)
X7: (20053,)
X8: (20053,)
X9: (20028,)
X10: (20028,)
Y1: (15596,)
Y2: (15596,)
Y3: (17082,)
Y4: (17082,)
Y5: (18568,)
Y6: (18568,)
Y7: (20053,)
Y8: (20053,)
Y9: (15596,)
Y10: (15596,)
(15596, 64713)
(15596, 64713)
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.1
Logistic F1-score 19.563936358279317
Logistic ROCAUC score: 53.95427515764767
Logistic Recall score: 11.511789181692095
Logistic Precision Score: 65.09803921568627
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[2381   89]
 [1276  166]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.96      0.78      2470
           1       0.65      0.12      0.20      1442

    accuracy                           0.65      3912
   macro avg       0.65      0.54      0.49      3912
weighted avg       0.65      0.65      0.56      3912


Logistic Accuracy Score 65.10736196319019
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.23038411140441895 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.1
DCT F1-score 25.196027182435966
DCT ROCAUC score: 53.70057893052271
DCT Recall score: 16.712898751733704
DCT Precision Score: 51.167728237791934
DCT Confusion Matrix [[2240  230]
 [1201  241]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.91      0.76      2470
           1       0.51      0.17      0.25      1442

    accuracy                           0.63      3912
   macro avg       0.58      0.54      0.50      3912
weighted avg       0.60      0.63      0.57      3912


DCT Accuracy Score 63.420245398773
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  1.182832956314087 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.1
Naive F1-score 12.79290690310323
Naive ROCAUC score: 52.77333550455676
Naive Recall score: 7.004160887656033
Naive Precision Score: 73.72262773722628
Naive Confusion Matrix [[2434   36]
 [1341  101]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.99      0.78      2470
           1       0.74      0.07      0.13      1442

    accuracy                           0.65      3912
   macro avg       0.69      0.53      0.45      3912
weighted avg       0.68      0.65      0.54      3912


Naive Accuracy Score 64.80061349693251
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.007978677749633789 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.1
XGB F1-Score 17.9173938336242
XGB ROCAUC Score: 60.08119019361502
XGB Recall score: 55.5956678700361
XGB Precision Score: 10.679611650485436
XGB Confusion Matrix [[2347 1288]
 [ 123  154]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.65      0.77      3635
           1       0.11      0.56      0.18       277

    accuracy                           0.64      3912
   macro avg       0.53      0.60      0.47      3912
weighted avg       0.89      0.64      0.73      3912


XGB Accuracy Score 64.80061349693251
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  1.0701344013214111 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.1
RFC F1 score 22.08450704225352
RFC ROCAUC Score: 54.022837152627645
RFC Recall score: 58.85885885885885
RFC Precision Score: 13.592233009708737
RFC Confusion Matrix [[2333  137]
 [1246  196]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.94      0.77      2470
           1       0.59      0.14      0.22      1442

    accuracy                           0.65      3912
   macro avg       0.62      0.54      0.50      3912
weighted avg       0.63      0.65      0.57      3912


RFC Accuracy Score 64.64723926380368
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  395.3498463630676 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb Test-Size 0.05 : [array([0.37745165, 0.34561596, 0.37745165, ..., 0.37745165, 0.30342226,
       0.490122  ])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb Test-Size: 0.05 : [0.19563936358279316]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.05 : [0.5395427515764767]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.05 : [0.11511789181692095]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.05 : [0.6509803921568628]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.05 : [0.6510736196319018]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.05 : [array([0.39488409, 1.        , 0.39488409, ..., 0.39488409, 0.25      ,
       1.        ])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.05 : [0.25196027182435965]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.05 : [0.5370057893052271]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.05 : [0.16712898751733704]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.05 : [0.5116772823779193]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.05 : [0.63420245398773]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.05 : [array([0.37841984, 0.1954004 , 0.37841984, ..., 0.37841984, 0.23545256,
       0.27413523])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.05 : [0.1279290690310323]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.05 : [0.5277333550455676]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.05 : [0.07004160887656033]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.05 : [0.7372262773722628]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.05 : [0.6480061349693251]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.05 : [array([0.37817496, 0.2904235 , 0.37817496, ..., 0.37817496, 0.37817496,
       0.57979214], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.05 : [0.179173938336242]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.05 : [0.6008119019361502]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.05 : [0.555956678700361]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.05 : [0.10679611650485436]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.05 : [0.6393149284253579]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.05 : [array([0.3950432 , 0.23539779, 0.3950432 , ..., 0.3950432 , 0.2522571 ,
       0.55148929])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.05 : [0.2208450704225352]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.05 : [0.5402283715262765]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.05 : [0.5885885885885885]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.05 : [0.13592233009708737]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.05 : [0.6464723926380368]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.2
Logistic F1-score 28.309022150189094
Logistic ROCAUC score: 56.97368464628602
Logistic Recall score: 17.397078353253654
Logistic Precision Score: 75.94202898550725
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[2323   83]
 [1244  262]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.97      0.78      2406
           1       0.76      0.17      0.28      1506

    accuracy                           0.66      3912
   macro avg       0.71      0.57      0.53      3912
weighted avg       0.69      0.66      0.59      3912


Logistic Accuracy Score 66.07873210633947
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.27722668647766113 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.2
DCT F1-score 30.22222222222222
DCT ROCAUC score: 55.73292863458883
DCT Recall score: 20.318725099601593
DCT Precision Score: 58.95953757225434
DCT Confusion Matrix [[2193  213]
 [1200  306]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.91      0.76      2406
           1       0.59      0.20      0.30      1506

    accuracy                           0.64      3912
   macro avg       0.62      0.56      0.53      3912
weighted avg       0.62      0.64      0.58      3912


DCT Accuracy Score 63.880368098159515
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  2.8543927669525146 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.2
Naive F1-score 19.50087057457922
Naive ROCAUC score: 54.559401628730285
Naive Recall score: 11.155378486055776
Naive Precision Score: 77.41935483870968
Naive Confusion Matrix [[2357   49]
 [1338  168]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.98      0.77      2406
           1       0.77      0.11      0.20      1506

    accuracy                           0.65      3912
   macro avg       0.71      0.55      0.48      3912
weighted avg       0.69      0.65      0.55      3912


Naive Accuracy Score 64.54498977505112
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.010971546173095703 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.2
XGB F1-Score 23.055400111919415
XGB ROCAUC Score: 68.75339969871932
XGB Recall score: 73.30960854092527
XGB Precision Score: 13.678618857901725
XGB Confusion Matrix [[2331 1300]
 [  75  206]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.97      0.64      0.77      3631
           1       0.14      0.73      0.23       281

    accuracy                           0.65      3912
   macro avg       0.55      0.69      0.50      3912
weighted avg       0.91      0.65      0.73      3912


XGB Accuracy Score 64.54498977505112
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  0.9075696468353271 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.2
RFC F1 score 30.79331941544885
RFC ROCAUC Score: 57.40429801989052
RFC Recall score: 71.95121951219512
RFC Precision Score: 19.588313413014607
RFC Confusion Matrix [[2291  115]
 [1211  295]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.95      0.78      2406
           1       0.72      0.20      0.31      1506

    accuracy                           0.66      3912
   macro avg       0.69      0.57      0.54      3912
weighted avg       0.68      0.66      0.60      3912


RFC Accuracy Score 66.1042944785276
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  909.6792013645172 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb Test-Size 0.05 : [array([0.37745165, 0.34561596, 0.37745165, ..., 0.37745165, 0.30342226,
       0.490122  ]), array([0.35969295, 0.37757544, 0.2303291 , ..., 0.37757544, 0.37757544,
       0.51257988])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb Test-Size: 0.05 : [0.19563936358279316, 0.28309022150189095]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.05 : [0.5395427515764767, 0.5697368464628602]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.05 : [0.11511789181692095, 0.17397078353253653]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.05 : [0.6509803921568628, 0.7594202898550725]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.05 : [0.6510736196319018, 0.6607873210633947]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.05 : [array([0.39488409, 1.        , 0.39488409, ..., 0.39488409, 0.25      ,
       1.        ]), array([0.39266465, 0.39266465, 0.        , ..., 0.39266465, 0.39266465,
       0.        ])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.05 : [0.25196027182435965, 0.3022222222222222]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.05 : [0.5370057893052271, 0.5573292863458883]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.05 : [0.16712898751733704, 0.20318725099601595]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.05 : [0.5116772823779193, 0.5895953757225434]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.05 : [0.63420245398773, 0.6388036809815951]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.05 : [array([0.37841984, 0.1954004 , 0.37841984, ..., 0.37841984, 0.23545256,
       0.27413523]), array([0.37063523, 0.37909875, 0.13229871, ..., 0.41171064, 0.37909875,
       0.16057884])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.05 : [0.1279290690310323, 0.1950087057457922]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.05 : [0.5277333550455676, 0.5455940162873029]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.05 : [0.07004160887656033, 0.11155378486055777]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.05 : [0.7372262773722628, 0.7741935483870968]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.05 : [0.6480061349693251, 0.6454498977505112]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.05 : [array([0.37817496, 0.2904235 , 0.37817496, ..., 0.37817496, 0.37817496,
       0.57979214], dtype=float32), array([0.37915805, 0.37915805, 0.30997664, ..., 0.37915805, 0.37915805,
       0.46987507], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.05 : [0.179173938336242, 0.23055400111919416]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.05 : [0.6008119019361502, 0.6875339969871932]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.05 : [0.555956678700361, 0.7330960854092526]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.05 : [0.10679611650485436, 0.13678618857901725]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.05 : [0.6393149284253579, 0.648517382413088]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.05 : [array([0.3950432 , 0.23539779, 0.3950432 , ..., 0.3950432 , 0.2522571 ,
       0.55148929]), array([0.39271671, 0.39271671, 0.11587065, ..., 0.39271671, 0.39271671,
       0.45086835])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.05 : [0.2208450704225352, 0.3079331941544885]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.05 : [0.5402283715262765, 0.5740429801989052]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.05 : [0.5885885885885885, 0.7195121951219512]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.05 : [0.13592233009708737, 0.19588313413014607]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.05 : [0.6464723926380368, 0.661042944785276]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.3
Logistic F1-score 28.71341800110437
Logistic ROCAUC score: 57.03495768424447
Logistic Recall score: 17.82042494859493
Logistic Precision Score: 73.86363636363636
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[2361   92]
 [1199  260]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.66      0.96      0.79      2453
           1       0.74      0.18      0.29      1459

    accuracy                           0.67      3912
   macro avg       0.70      0.57      0.54      3912
weighted avg       0.69      0.67      0.60      3912


Logistic Accuracy Score 66.99897750511248
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.21137690544128418 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.3
DCT F1-score 30.26973026973027
DCT ROCAUC score: 55.491855519824796
DCT Recall score: 20.767649074708704
DCT Precision Score: 55.80110497237569
DCT Confusion Matrix [[2213  240]
 [1156  303]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.66      0.90      0.76      2453
           1       0.56      0.21      0.30      1459

    accuracy                           0.64      3912
   macro avg       0.61      0.55      0.53      3912
weighted avg       0.62      0.64      0.59      3912


DCT Accuracy Score 64.31492842535788
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  4.441147804260254 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.3
Naive F1-score 21.19976703552708
Naive ROCAUC score: 54.68802520979054
Naive Recall score: 12.47429746401645
Naive Precision Score: 70.54263565891473
Naive Confusion Matrix [[2377   76]
 [1277  182]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.97      0.78      2453
           1       0.71      0.12      0.21      1459

    accuracy                           0.65      3912
   macro avg       0.68      0.55      0.50      3912
weighted avg       0.67      0.65      0.57      3912


Naive Accuracy Score 65.41411042944786
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.01194906234741211 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.3
XGB F1-Score 19.77633902295468
XGB ROCAUC Score: 67.42102396514163
XGB Recall score: 70.0
XGB Precision Score: 11.514736120630568
XGB Confusion Matrix [[2381 1291]
 [  72  168]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.97      0.65      0.78      3672
           1       0.12      0.70      0.20       240

    accuracy                           0.65      3912
   macro avg       0.54      0.67      0.49      3912
weighted avg       0.92      0.65      0.74      3912


XGB Accuracy Score 65.41411042944786
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  1.1528794765472412 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.3
RFC F1 score 29.056203605514312
RFC ROCAUC Score: 56.27136289731531
RFC Recall score: 64.16861826697892
RFC Precision Score: 18.77998629198081
RFC Confusion Matrix [[2300  153]
 [1185  274]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.66      0.94      0.77      2453
           1       0.64      0.19      0.29      1459

    accuracy                           0.66      3912
   macro avg       0.65      0.56      0.53      3912
weighted avg       0.65      0.66      0.59      3912


RFC Accuracy Score 65.79754601226993
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  1468.142359495163 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb Test-Size 0.05 : [array([0.37745165, 0.34561596, 0.37745165, ..., 0.37745165, 0.30342226,
       0.490122  ]), array([0.35969295, 0.37757544, 0.2303291 , ..., 0.37757544, 0.37757544,
       0.51257988]), array([0.38487024, 0.38487024, 0.38487024, ..., 0.16568233, 0.64936759,
       0.40158687])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb Test-Size: 0.05 : [0.19563936358279316, 0.28309022150189095, 0.2871341800110437]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.05 : [0.5395427515764767, 0.5697368464628602, 0.5703495768424447]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.05 : [0.11511789181692095, 0.17397078353253653, 0.1782042494859493]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.05 : [0.6509803921568628, 0.7594202898550725, 0.7386363636363636]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.05 : [0.6510736196319018, 0.6607873210633947, 0.6699897750511248]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.05 : [array([0.39488409, 1.        , 0.39488409, ..., 0.39488409, 0.25      ,
       1.        ]), array([0.39266465, 0.39266465, 0.        , ..., 0.39266465, 0.39266465,
       0.        ]), array([0.39750619, 0.39750619, 0.39750619, ..., 0.        , 1.        ,
       1.        ])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.05 : [0.25196027182435965, 0.3022222222222222, 0.3026973026973027]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.05 : [0.5370057893052271, 0.5573292863458883, 0.554918555198248]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.05 : [0.16712898751733704, 0.20318725099601595, 0.20767649074708705]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.05 : [0.5116772823779193, 0.5895953757225434, 0.5580110497237569]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.05 : [0.63420245398773, 0.6388036809815951, 0.6431492842535788]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.05 : [array([0.37841984, 0.1954004 , 0.37841984, ..., 0.37841984, 0.23545256,
       0.27413523]), array([0.37063523, 0.37909875, 0.13229871, ..., 0.41171064, 0.37909875,
       0.16057884]), array([0.38149821, 0.38149821, 0.38149821, ..., 0.11241208, 0.45636509,
       0.42508616])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.05 : [0.1279290690310323, 0.1950087057457922, 0.2119976703552708]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.05 : [0.5277333550455676, 0.5455940162873029, 0.5468802520979054]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.05 : [0.07004160887656033, 0.11155378486055777, 0.1247429746401645]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.05 : [0.7372262773722628, 0.7741935483870968, 0.7054263565891473]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.05 : [0.6480061349693251, 0.6454498977505112, 0.6541411042944786]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.05 : [array([0.37817496, 0.2904235 , 0.37817496, ..., 0.37817496, 0.37817496,
       0.57979214], dtype=float32), array([0.37915805, 0.37915805, 0.30997664, ..., 0.37915805, 0.37915805,
       0.46987507], dtype=float32), array([0.38427654, 0.38427654, 0.38427654, ..., 0.38427654, 0.45566007,
       0.38427654], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.05 : [0.179173938336242, 0.23055400111919416, 0.1977633902295468]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.05 : [0.6008119019361502, 0.6875339969871932, 0.6742102396514162]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.05 : [0.555956678700361, 0.7330960854092526, 0.7]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.05 : [0.10679611650485436, 0.13678618857901725, 0.11514736120630568]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.05 : [0.6393149284253579, 0.648517382413088, 0.6515848670756647]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.05 : [array([0.3950432 , 0.23539779, 0.3950432 , ..., 0.3950432 , 0.2522571 ,
       0.55148929]), array([0.39271671, 0.39271671, 0.11587065, ..., 0.39271671, 0.39271671,
       0.45086835]), array([0.39759085, 0.39759085, 0.39759085, ..., 0.00932653, 0.47505946,
       0.42931958])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.05 : [0.2208450704225352, 0.3079331941544885, 0.29056203605514314]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.05 : [0.5402283715262765, 0.5740429801989052, 0.5627136289731531]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.05 : [0.5885885885885885, 0.7195121951219512, 0.6416861826697893]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.05 : [0.13592233009708737, 0.19588313413014607, 0.18779986291980807]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.05 : [0.6464723926380368, 0.661042944785276, 0.6579754601226994]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.4
Logistic F1-score 33.29842931937173
Logistic ROCAUC score: 58.36695781291915
Logistic Recall score: 21.57394843962008
Logistic Precision Score: 72.93577981651376
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[2320  118]
 [1156  318]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.67      0.95      0.78      2438
           1       0.73      0.22      0.33      1474

    accuracy                           0.67      3912
   macro avg       0.70      0.58      0.56      3912
weighted avg       0.69      0.67      0.61      3912


Logistic Accuracy Score 67.43353783231085
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.217390775680542 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.4
DCT F1-score 32.6713008937438
DCT ROCAUC score: 56.832791074829444
DCT Recall score: 22.3202170963365
DCT Precision Score: 60.92592592592593
DCT Confusion Matrix [[2227  211]
 [1145  329]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.66      0.91      0.77      2438
           1       0.61      0.22      0.33      1474

    accuracy                           0.65      3912
   macro avg       0.63      0.57      0.55      3912
weighted avg       0.64      0.65      0.60      3912


DCT Accuracy Score 65.33742331288343
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  6.459743499755859 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.4
Naive F1-score 26.106442577030815
Naive ROCAUC score: 56.303991638496306
Naive Recall score: 15.807327001356853
Naive Precision Score: 74.91961414790997
Naive Confusion Matrix [[2360   78]
 [1241  233]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.66      0.97      0.78      2438
           1       0.75      0.16      0.26      1474

    accuracy                           0.66      3912
   macro avg       0.70      0.56      0.52      3912
weighted avg       0.69      0.66      0.59      3912


Naive Accuracy Score 66.28323108384458
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.010954141616821289 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.4
XGB F1-Score 22.299248989023685
XGB ROCAUC Score: 70.02469832381419
XGB Recall score: 75.09727626459144
XGB Precision Score: 13.093622795115332
XGB Confusion Matrix [[2374 1281]
 [  64  193]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.97      0.65      0.78      3655
           1       0.13      0.75      0.22       257

    accuracy                           0.66      3912
   macro avg       0.55      0.70      0.50      3912
weighted avg       0.92      0.66      0.74      3912


XGB Accuracy Score 66.28323108384458
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  1.4371531009674072 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.4
RFC F1 score 33.14403717088281
RFC ROCAUC Score: 57.976514993827934
RFC Recall score: 69.3304535637149
RFC Precision Score: 21.777476255088196
RFC Confusion Matrix [[2296  142]
 [1153  321]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.67      0.94      0.78      2438
           1       0.69      0.22      0.33      1474

    accuracy                           0.67      3912
   macro avg       0.68      0.58      0.56      3912
weighted avg       0.68      0.67      0.61      3912


RFC Accuracy Score 66.89672801635992
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  2045.3126146793365 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb Test-Size 0.05 : [array([0.37745165, 0.34561596, 0.37745165, ..., 0.37745165, 0.30342226,
       0.490122  ]), array([0.35969295, 0.37757544, 0.2303291 , ..., 0.37757544, 0.37757544,
       0.51257988]), array([0.38487024, 0.38487024, 0.38487024, ..., 0.16568233, 0.64936759,
       0.40158687]), array([0.3350407 , 0.38320469, 0.47994677, ..., 0.36787781, 0.38320469,
       0.13953791])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb Test-Size: 0.05 : [0.19563936358279316, 0.28309022150189095, 0.2871341800110437, 0.33298429319371725]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.05 : [0.5395427515764767, 0.5697368464628602, 0.5703495768424447, 0.5836695781291915]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.05 : [0.11511789181692095, 0.17397078353253653, 0.1782042494859493, 0.2157394843962008]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.05 : [0.6509803921568628, 0.7594202898550725, 0.7386363636363636, 0.7293577981651376]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.05 : [0.6510736196319018, 0.6607873210633947, 0.6699897750511248, 0.6743353783231084]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.05 : [array([0.39488409, 1.        , 0.39488409, ..., 0.39488409, 0.25      ,
       1.        ]), array([0.39266465, 0.39266465, 0.        , ..., 0.39266465, 0.39266465,
       0.        ]), array([0.39750619, 0.39750619, 0.39750619, ..., 0.        , 1.        ,
       1.        ]), array([0.31818182, 0.39672327, 0.        , ..., 0.66666667, 0.39672327,
       0.        ])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.05 : [0.25196027182435965, 0.3022222222222222, 0.3026973026973027, 0.326713008937438]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.05 : [0.5370057893052271, 0.5573292863458883, 0.554918555198248, 0.5683279107482945]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.05 : [0.16712898751733704, 0.20318725099601595, 0.20767649074708705, 0.223202170963365]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.05 : [0.5116772823779193, 0.5895953757225434, 0.5580110497237569, 0.6092592592592593]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.05 : [0.63420245398773, 0.6388036809815951, 0.6431492842535788, 0.6533742331288344]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.05 : [array([0.37841984, 0.1954004 , 0.37841984, ..., 0.37841984, 0.23545256,
       0.27413523]), array([0.37063523, 0.37909875, 0.13229871, ..., 0.41171064, 0.37909875,
       0.16057884]), array([0.38149821, 0.38149821, 0.38149821, ..., 0.11241208, 0.45636509,
       0.42508616]), array([0.28609481, 0.38129175, 0.21878362, ..., 0.34718744, 0.38129175,
       0.17644198])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.05 : [0.1279290690310323, 0.1950087057457922, 0.2119976703552708, 0.26106442577030814]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.05 : [0.5277333550455676, 0.5455940162873029, 0.5468802520979054, 0.5630399163849631]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.05 : [0.07004160887656033, 0.11155378486055777, 0.1247429746401645, 0.15807327001356852]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.05 : [0.7372262773722628, 0.7741935483870968, 0.7054263565891473, 0.7491961414790996]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.05 : [0.6480061349693251, 0.6454498977505112, 0.6541411042944786, 0.6628323108384458]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.05 : [array([0.37817496, 0.2904235 , 0.37817496, ..., 0.37817496, 0.37817496,
       0.57979214], dtype=float32), array([0.37915805, 0.37915805, 0.30997664, ..., 0.37915805, 0.37915805,
       0.46987507], dtype=float32), array([0.38427654, 0.38427654, 0.38427654, ..., 0.38427654, 0.45566007,
       0.38427654], dtype=float32), array([0.38312894, 0.38312894, 0.23326597, ..., 0.38312894, 0.38312894,
       0.05722107], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.05 : [0.179173938336242, 0.23055400111919416, 0.1977633902295468, 0.22299248989023684]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.05 : [0.6008119019361502, 0.6875339969871932, 0.6742102396514162, 0.7002469832381419]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.05 : [0.555956678700361, 0.7330960854092526, 0.7, 0.7509727626459144]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.05 : [0.10679611650485436, 0.13678618857901725, 0.11514736120630568, 0.1309362279511533]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.05 : [0.6393149284253579, 0.648517382413088, 0.6515848670756647, 0.6561860940695297]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.05 : [array([0.3950432 , 0.23539779, 0.3950432 , ..., 0.3950432 , 0.2522571 ,
       0.55148929]), array([0.39271671, 0.39271671, 0.11587065, ..., 0.39271671, 0.39271671,
       0.45086835]), array([0.39759085, 0.39759085, 0.39759085, ..., 0.00932653, 0.47505946,
       0.42931958]), array([0.31537703, 0.39648235, 0.37950952, ..., 0.64988006, 0.39648235,
       0.04989069])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.05 : [0.2208450704225352, 0.3079331941544885, 0.29056203605514314, 0.3314403717088281]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.05 : [0.5402283715262765, 0.5740429801989052, 0.5627136289731531, 0.5797651499382793]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.05 : [0.5885885885885885, 0.7195121951219512, 0.6416861826697893, 0.693304535637149]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.05 : [0.13592233009708737, 0.19588313413014607, 0.18779986291980807, 0.21777476255088196]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.05 : [0.6464723926380368, 0.661042944785276, 0.6579754601226994, 0.6689672801635992]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.5
Logistic F1-score 32.465543644716696
Logistic ROCAUC score: 57.57832406443178
Logistic Recall score: 21.31367292225201
Logistic Precision Score: 68.09421841541756
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[2271  149]
 [1174  318]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.66      0.94      0.77      2420
           1       0.68      0.21      0.32      1492

    accuracy                           0.66      3912
   macro avg       0.67      0.58      0.55      3912
weighted avg       0.67      0.66      0.60      3912


Logistic Accuracy Score 66.18098159509202
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.27526164054870605 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.5
DCT F1-score 31.665857212238947
DCT ROCAUC score: 55.94559413289611
DCT Recall score: 21.84986595174263
DCT Precision Score: 57.49559082892416
DCT Confusion Matrix [[2179  241]
 [1166  326]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.90      0.76      2420
           1       0.57      0.22      0.32      1492

    accuracy                           0.64      3912
   macro avg       0.61      0.56      0.54      3912
weighted avg       0.62      0.64      0.59      3912


DCT Accuracy Score 64.03374233128835
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  8.878193616867065 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.5
Naive F1-score 26.854358419057927
Naive ROCAUC score: 56.10024815545167
Naive Recall score: 16.621983914209114
Naive Precision Score: 69.85915492957746
Naive Confusion Matrix [[2313  107]
 [1244  248]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.96      0.77      2420
           1       0.70      0.17      0.27      1492

    accuracy                           0.65      3912
   macro avg       0.67      0.56      0.52      3912
weighted avg       0.67      0.65      0.58      3912


Naive Accuracy Score 65.46523517382413
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.011968135833740234 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.5
XGB F1-Score 20.725388601036272
XGB ROCAUC Score: 68.8454110850776
XGB Recall score: 73.46938775510205
XGB Precision Score: 12.064343163538874
XGB Confusion Matrix [[2355 1312]
 [  65  180]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.97      0.64      0.77      3667
           1       0.12      0.73      0.21       245

    accuracy                           0.65      3912
   macro avg       0.55      0.69      0.49      3912
weighted avg       0.92      0.65      0.74      3912


XGB Accuracy Score 65.46523517382413
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  1.7453269958496094 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.5
RFC F1 score 31.947921882824236
RFC ROCAUC Score: 56.8473733188576
RFC Recall score: 63.16831683168317
RFC Precision Score: 21.380697050938338
RFC Confusion Matrix [[2234  186]
 [1173  319]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.66      0.92      0.77      2420
           1       0.63      0.21      0.32      1492

    accuracy                           0.65      3912
   macro avg       0.64      0.57      0.54      3912
weighted avg       0.65      0.65      0.60      3912


RFC Accuracy Score 65.26073619631902
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  2775.383545398712 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb Test-Size 0.05 : [array([0.37745165, 0.34561596, 0.37745165, ..., 0.37745165, 0.30342226,
       0.490122  ]), array([0.35969295, 0.37757544, 0.2303291 , ..., 0.37757544, 0.37757544,
       0.51257988]), array([0.38487024, 0.38487024, 0.38487024, ..., 0.16568233, 0.64936759,
       0.40158687]), array([0.3350407 , 0.38320469, 0.47994677, ..., 0.36787781, 0.38320469,
       0.13953791]), array([0.38113469, 0.38113469, 0.37113081, ..., 0.36868304, 0.38113469,
       0.50675539])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb Test-Size: 0.05 : [0.19563936358279316, 0.28309022150189095, 0.2871341800110437, 0.33298429319371725, 0.32465543644716693]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.05 : [0.5395427515764767, 0.5697368464628602, 0.5703495768424447, 0.5836695781291915, 0.5757832406443179]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.05 : [0.11511789181692095, 0.17397078353253653, 0.1782042494859493, 0.2157394843962008, 0.2131367292225201]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.05 : [0.6509803921568628, 0.7594202898550725, 0.7386363636363636, 0.7293577981651376, 0.6809421841541756]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.05 : [0.6510736196319018, 0.6607873210633947, 0.6699897750511248, 0.6743353783231084, 0.6618098159509203]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.05 : [array([0.39488409, 1.        , 0.39488409, ..., 0.39488409, 0.25      ,
       1.        ]), array([0.39266465, 0.39266465, 0.        , ..., 0.39266465, 0.39266465,
       0.        ]), array([0.39750619, 0.39750619, 0.39750619, ..., 0.        , 1.        ,
       1.        ]), array([0.31818182, 0.39672327, 0.        , ..., 0.66666667, 0.39672327,
       0.        ]), array([0.39429477, 0.39429477, 1.        , ..., 0.37113402, 0.39429477,
       1.        ])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.05 : [0.25196027182435965, 0.3022222222222222, 0.3026973026973027, 0.326713008937438, 0.31665857212238946]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.05 : [0.5370057893052271, 0.5573292863458883, 0.554918555198248, 0.5683279107482945, 0.5594559413289611]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.05 : [0.16712898751733704, 0.20318725099601595, 0.20767649074708705, 0.223202170963365, 0.21849865951742628]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.05 : [0.5116772823779193, 0.5895953757225434, 0.5580110497237569, 0.6092592592592593, 0.5749559082892416]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.05 : [0.63420245398773, 0.6388036809815951, 0.6431492842535788, 0.6533742331288344, 0.6403374233128835]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.05 : [array([0.37841984, 0.1954004 , 0.37841984, ..., 0.37841984, 0.23545256,
       0.27413523]), array([0.37063523, 0.37909875, 0.13229871, ..., 0.41171064, 0.37909875,
       0.16057884]), array([0.38149821, 0.38149821, 0.38149821, ..., 0.11241208, 0.45636509,
       0.42508616]), array([0.28609481, 0.38129175, 0.21878362, ..., 0.34718744, 0.38129175,
       0.17644198]), array([0.38101447, 0.38101447, 0.24439702, ..., 0.31735433, 0.38101447,
       0.49230867])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.05 : [0.1279290690310323, 0.1950087057457922, 0.2119976703552708, 0.26106442577030814, 0.2685435841905793]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.05 : [0.5277333550455676, 0.5455940162873029, 0.5468802520979054, 0.5630399163849631, 0.5610024815545167]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.05 : [0.07004160887656033, 0.11155378486055777, 0.1247429746401645, 0.15807327001356852, 0.16621983914209115]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.05 : [0.7372262773722628, 0.7741935483870968, 0.7054263565891473, 0.7491961414790996, 0.6985915492957746]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.05 : [0.6480061349693251, 0.6454498977505112, 0.6541411042944786, 0.6628323108384458, 0.6546523517382413]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.05 : [array([0.37817496, 0.2904235 , 0.37817496, ..., 0.37817496, 0.37817496,
       0.57979214], dtype=float32), array([0.37915805, 0.37915805, 0.30997664, ..., 0.37915805, 0.37915805,
       0.46987507], dtype=float32), array([0.38427654, 0.38427654, 0.38427654, ..., 0.38427654, 0.45566007,
       0.38427654], dtype=float32), array([0.38312894, 0.38312894, 0.23326597, ..., 0.38312894, 0.38312894,
       0.05722107], dtype=float32), array([0.38058403, 0.38058403, 0.38058403, ..., 0.38058403, 0.38058403,
       0.38058403], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.05 : [0.179173938336242, 0.23055400111919416, 0.1977633902295468, 0.22299248989023684, 0.2072538860103627]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.05 : [0.6008119019361502, 0.6875339969871932, 0.6742102396514162, 0.7002469832381419, 0.688454110850776]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.05 : [0.555956678700361, 0.7330960854092526, 0.7, 0.7509727626459144, 0.7346938775510204]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.05 : [0.10679611650485436, 0.13678618857901725, 0.11514736120630568, 0.1309362279511533, 0.12064343163538874]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.05 : [0.6393149284253579, 0.648517382413088, 0.6515848670756647, 0.6561860940695297, 0.6480061349693251]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.05 : [array([0.3950432 , 0.23539779, 0.3950432 , ..., 0.3950432 , 0.2522571 ,
       0.55148929]), array([0.39271671, 0.39271671, 0.11587065, ..., 0.39271671, 0.39271671,
       0.45086835]), array([0.39759085, 0.39759085, 0.39759085, ..., 0.00932653, 0.47505946,
       0.42931958]), array([0.31537703, 0.39648235, 0.37950952, ..., 0.64988006, 0.39648235,
       0.04989069]), array([0.39422409, 0.39422409, 0.28065043, ..., 0.36959609, 0.39422409,
       0.90124301])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.05 : [0.2208450704225352, 0.3079331941544885, 0.29056203605514314, 0.3314403717088281, 0.3194792188282424]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.05 : [0.5402283715262765, 0.5740429801989052, 0.5627136289731531, 0.5797651499382793, 0.568473733188576]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.05 : [0.5885885885885885, 0.7195121951219512, 0.6416861826697893, 0.693304535637149, 0.6316831683168317]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.05 : [0.13592233009708737, 0.19588313413014607, 0.18779986291980807, 0.21777476255088196, 0.21380697050938338]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.05 : [0.6464723926380368, 0.661042944785276, 0.6579754601226994, 0.6689672801635992, 0.6526073619631901]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.05
Logistic F1-score 15.722266560255388
Logistic ROCAUC score: 52.952126978465465
Logistic Recall score: 8.968814022308218
Logistic Precision Score: 63.65105008077544
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[7117  225]
 [3999  394]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.97      0.77      7342
           1       0.64      0.09      0.16      4393

    accuracy                           0.64     11735
   macro avg       0.64      0.53      0.46     11735
weighted avg       0.64      0.64      0.54     11735


Logistic Accuracy Score 64.00511291009799
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.2263939380645752 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.05
DCT F1-score 22.345786272806254
DCT ROCAUC score: 52.42197521712902
DCT Recall score: 14.63692237650808
DCT Precision Score: 47.20998531571219
DCT Confusion Matrix [[6623  719]
 [3750  643]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.90      0.75      7342
           1       0.47      0.15      0.22      4393

    accuracy                           0.62     11735
   macro avg       0.56      0.52      0.49     11735
weighted avg       0.58      0.62      0.55     11735


DCT Accuracy Score 61.917341286749036
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  0.6123964786529541 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.05
Naive F1-score 9.43915343915344
Naive ROCAUC score: 51.79582429216932
Naive Recall score: 5.076257682676986
Naive Precision Score: 67.16867469879519
Naive Confusion Matrix [[7233  109]
 [4170  223]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.99      0.77      7342
           1       0.67      0.05      0.09      4393

    accuracy                           0.64     11735
   macro avg       0.65      0.52      0.43     11735
weighted avg       0.65      0.64      0.52     11735


Naive Accuracy Score 63.536429484448234
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.015992403030395508 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.05
XGB F1-Score 16.20583717357911
XGB ROCAUC Score: 57.70733611991281
XGB Recall score: 51.77914110429448
XGB Precision Score: 9.606191668563625
XGB Confusion Matrix [[6949 3971]
 [ 393  422]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.64      0.76     10920
           1       0.10      0.52      0.16       815

    accuracy                           0.63     11735
   macro avg       0.52      0.58      0.46     11735
weighted avg       0.89      0.63      0.72     11735


XGB Accuracy Score 63.536429484448234
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  0.4976329803466797 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.05
RFC F1 score 20.13875867241703
RFC ROCAUC Score: 53.36751256595969
RFC Recall score: 57.12765957446808
RFC Precision Score: 12.223992715684043
RFC Confusion Matrix [[6939  403]
 [3856  537]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.95      0.77      7342
           1       0.57      0.12      0.20      4393

    accuracy                           0.64     11735
   macro avg       0.61      0.53      0.48     11735
weighted avg       0.62      0.64      0.55     11735


RFC Accuracy Score 63.70685982104815
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  188.90242838859558 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.15 : [array([0.55461446, 0.37644218, 0.33936103, ..., 0.37644218, 0.37644218,
       0.37644218])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.15 : [0.15722266560255388]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.15 : [0.5295212697846546]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.15 : [0.08968814022308218]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.15 : [0.6365105008077544]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.15 : [0.6400511291009799]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.15 : [array([1.        , 0.38772298, 0.38772298, ..., 0.38772298, 0.38772298,
       0.38772298])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.15 : [0.22345786272806253]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.15 : [0.5242197521712901]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.15 : [0.1463692237650808]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.15 : [0.4720998531571219]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.15 : [0.6191734128674904]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.15 : [array([0.38382667, 0.37867553, 0.30596811, ..., 0.37867553, 0.37867553,
       0.37867553])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.15 : [0.0943915343915344]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.15 : [0.5179582429216932]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.15 : [0.050762576826769865]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.15 : [0.6716867469879518]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.15 : [0.6353642948444823]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.15 : [array([0.7874387 , 0.38061774, 0.38061774, ..., 0.38061774, 0.38061774,
       0.38061774], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.15 : [0.1620583717357911]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.15 : [0.5770733611991281]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.15 : [0.5177914110429448]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.15 : [0.09606191668563624]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.15 : [0.628121005538986]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.15 : [array([0.55695221, 0.38762603, 0.38534935, ..., 0.38762603, 0.38762603,
       0.38762603])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.15 : [0.2013875867241703]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.15 : [0.533675125659597]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.15 : [0.5712765957446808]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.15 : [0.12223992715684043]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.15 : [0.6370685982104815]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.1
Logistic F1-score 18.42259006815969
Logistic ROCAUC score: 54.102511553559395
Logistic Recall score: 10.52514463729417
Logistic Precision Score: 73.79095163806552
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[7073  168]
 [4021  473]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.98      0.77      7241
           1       0.74      0.11      0.18      4494

    accuracy                           0.64     11735
   macro avg       0.69      0.54      0.48     11735
weighted avg       0.68      0.64      0.55     11735


Logistic Accuracy Score 64.30336599914784
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.22633647918701172 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.1
DCT F1-score 24.08212980685575
DCT ROCAUC score: 53.82538008756569
DCT Recall score: 15.398308856252783
DCT Precision Score: 55.227454110135675
DCT Confusion Matrix [[6680  561]
 [3802  692]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.92      0.75      7241
           1       0.55      0.15      0.24      4494

    accuracy                           0.63     11735
   macro avg       0.59      0.54      0.50     11735
weighted avg       0.60      0.63      0.56     11735


DCT Accuracy Score 62.8206220707286
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  1.320465087890625 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.1
Naive F1-score 13.169734151329243
Naive ROCAUC score: 53.07157537060723
Naive Recall score: 7.165109034267912
Naive Precision Score: 81.31313131313132
Naive Confusion Matrix [[7167   74]
 [4172  322]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.99      0.77      7241
           1       0.81      0.07      0.13      4494

    accuracy                           0.64     11735
   macro avg       0.72      0.53      0.45     11735
weighted avg       0.70      0.64      0.53     11735


Naive Accuracy Score 63.81763953983809
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.016933917999267578 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.1
XGB F1-Score 17.677444040558637
XGB ROCAUC Score: 63.19038359142441
XGB Recall score: 63.02864938608458
XGB Precision Score: 10.2803738317757
XGB Confusion Matrix [[6970 4032]
 [ 271  462]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.96      0.63      0.76     11002
           1       0.10      0.63      0.18       733

    accuracy                           0.63     11735
   macro avg       0.53      0.63      0.47     11735
weighted avg       0.91      0.63      0.73     11735


XGB Accuracy Score 63.81763953983809
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  0.6602320671081543 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.1
RFC F1 score 23.95034684191311
RFC ROCAUC Score: 55.033739841370846
RFC Recall score: 66.66666666666666
RFC Precision Score: 14.597240765465063
RFC Confusion Matrix [[6913  328]
 [3838  656]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.95      0.77      7241
           1       0.67      0.15      0.24      4494

    accuracy                           0.64     11735
   macro avg       0.65      0.55      0.50     11735
weighted avg       0.65      0.64      0.57     11735


RFC Accuracy Score 64.49936088623775
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  457.24858474731445 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.15 : [array([0.55461446, 0.37644218, 0.33936103, ..., 0.37644218, 0.37644218,
       0.37644218]), array([0.26154957, 0.37404311, 0.37404311, ..., 0.43874059, 0.37404311,
       0.56296296])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.15 : [0.15722266560255388, 0.1842259006815969]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.15 : [0.5295212697846546, 0.541025115535594]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.15 : [0.08968814022308218, 0.1052514463729417]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.15 : [0.6365105008077544, 0.7379095163806553]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.15 : [0.6400511291009799, 0.6430336599914784]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.15 : [array([1.        , 0.38772298, 0.38772298, ..., 0.38772298, 0.38772298,
       0.38772298]), array([0.        , 0.38757155, 0.38757155, ..., 1.        , 0.38757155,
       0.38757155])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.15 : [0.22345786272806253, 0.2408212980685575]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.15 : [0.5242197521712901, 0.5382538008756569]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.15 : [0.1463692237650808, 0.15398308856252782]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.15 : [0.4720998531571219, 0.5522745411013568]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.15 : [0.6191734128674904, 0.6282062207072859]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.15 : [array([0.38382667, 0.37867553, 0.30596811, ..., 0.37867553, 0.37867553,
       0.37867553]), array([0.17733063, 0.39271211, 0.37356175, ..., 0.48896508, 0.39271211,
       0.47779735])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.15 : [0.0943915343915344, 0.13169734151329243]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.15 : [0.5179582429216932, 0.5307157537060723]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.15 : [0.050762576826769865, 0.07165109034267912]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.15 : [0.6716867469879518, 0.8131313131313131]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.15 : [0.6353642948444823, 0.6381763953983809]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.15 : [array([0.7874387 , 0.38061774, 0.38061774, ..., 0.38061774, 0.38061774,
       0.38061774], dtype=float32), array([0.37410617, 0.37410617, 0.37410617, ..., 0.37410617, 0.37410617,
       0.5742907 ], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.15 : [0.1620583717357911, 0.17677444040558637]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.15 : [0.5770733611991281, 0.631903835914244]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.15 : [0.5177914110429448, 0.6302864938608458]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.15 : [0.09606191668563624, 0.102803738317757]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.15 : [0.628121005538986, 0.6333191308052833]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.15 : [array([0.55695221, 0.38762603, 0.38534935, ..., 0.38762603, 0.38762603,
       0.38762603]), array([0.0479928 , 0.38776416, 0.38776416, ..., 0.68336366, 0.38776416,
       0.61637325])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.15 : [0.2013875867241703, 0.2395034684191311]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.15 : [0.533675125659597, 0.5503373984137084]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.15 : [0.5712765957446808, 0.6666666666666666]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.15 : [0.12223992715684043, 0.14597240765465064]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.15 : [0.6370685982104815, 0.6449936088623776]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.233
Logistic F1-score 26.9815709429236
Logistic ROCAUC score: 56.22014817684599
Logistic Recall score: 16.633575998235166
Logistic Precision Score: 71.40151515151516
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[6900  302]
 [3779  754]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.96      0.77      7202
           1       0.71      0.17      0.27      4533

    accuracy                           0.65     11735
   macro avg       0.68      0.56      0.52     11735
weighted avg       0.67      0.65      0.58     11735


Logistic Accuracy Score 65.22368981678738
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.8925764560699463 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.233
DCT F1-score 29.102990033222593
DCT ROCAUC score: 55.42059792568098
DCT Recall score: 19.324950363997353
DCT Precision Score: 58.91055817081372
DCT Confusion Matrix [[6591  611]
 [3657  876]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.92      0.76      7202
           1       0.59      0.19      0.29      4533

    accuracy                           0.64     11735
   macro avg       0.62      0.55      0.52     11735
weighted avg       0.62      0.64      0.58     11735


DCT Accuracy Score 63.63016616957818
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  3.6402580738067627 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.233
Naive F1-score 18.0547466511357
Naive ROCAUC score: 54.066848663811484
Naive Recall score: 10.258107213765719
Naive Precision Score: 75.24271844660194
Naive Confusion Matrix [[7049  153]
 [4068  465]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.98      0.77      7202
           1       0.75      0.10      0.18      4533

    accuracy                           0.64     11735
   macro avg       0.69      0.54      0.48     11735
weighted avg       0.68      0.64      0.54     11735


Naive Accuracy Score 64.03067746058798
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.020943641662597656 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.233
XGB F1-Score 19.26657799733992
XGB ROCAUC Score: 66.43434179980457
XGB Recall score: 69.45205479452055
XGB Precision Score: 11.184645929847784
XGB Confusion Matrix [[6979 4026]
 [ 223  507]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.97      0.63      0.77     11005
           1       0.11      0.69      0.19       730

    accuracy                           0.64     11735
   macro avg       0.54      0.66      0.48     11735
weighted avg       0.92      0.64      0.73     11735


XGB Accuracy Score 64.03067746058798
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  1.0551738739013672 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.233
RFC F1 score 28.64086096163861
RFC ROCAUC Score: 56.3020998836451
RFC Recall score: 67.18241042345277
RFC Precision Score: 18.199867637326275
RFC Confusion Matrix [[6799  403]
 [3708  825]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.94      0.77      7202
           1       0.67      0.18      0.29      4533

    accuracy                           0.65     11735
   macro avg       0.66      0.56      0.53     11735
weighted avg       0.66      0.65      0.58     11735


RFC Accuracy Score 64.96804431188752
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  1188.3804166316986 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.15 : [array([0.55461446, 0.37644218, 0.33936103, ..., 0.37644218, 0.37644218,
       0.37644218]), array([0.26154957, 0.37404311, 0.37404311, ..., 0.43874059, 0.37404311,
       0.56296296]), array([0.3742486 , 0.3742486 , 0.36501845, ..., 0.20665144, 0.3742486 ,
       0.3742486 ])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.15 : [0.15722266560255388, 0.1842259006815969, 0.269815709429236]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.15 : [0.5295212697846546, 0.541025115535594, 0.5622014817684599]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.15 : [0.08968814022308218, 0.1052514463729417, 0.16633575998235164]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.15 : [0.6365105008077544, 0.7379095163806553, 0.7140151515151515]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.15 : [0.6400511291009799, 0.6430336599914784, 0.6522368981678739]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.15 : [array([1.        , 0.38772298, 0.38772298, ..., 0.38772298, 0.38772298,
       0.38772298]), array([0.        , 0.38757155, 0.38757155, ..., 1.        , 0.38757155,
       0.38757155]), array([0.38876147, 0.38876147, 0.38876147, ..., 0.        , 0.38876147,
       0.38876147])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.15 : [0.22345786272806253, 0.2408212980685575, 0.2910299003322259]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.15 : [0.5242197521712901, 0.5382538008756569, 0.5542059792568098]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.15 : [0.1463692237650808, 0.15398308856252782, 0.19324950363997354]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.15 : [0.4720998531571219, 0.5522745411013568, 0.5891055817081372]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.15 : [0.6191734128674904, 0.6282062207072859, 0.6363016616957818]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.15 : [array([0.38382667, 0.37867553, 0.30596811, ..., 0.37867553, 0.37867553,
       0.37867553]), array([0.17733063, 0.39271211, 0.37356175, ..., 0.48896508, 0.39271211,
       0.47779735]), array([0.37477369, 0.37477369, 0.38137696, ..., 0.03401302, 0.37477369,
       0.37477369])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.15 : [0.0943915343915344, 0.13169734151329243, 0.180547466511357]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.15 : [0.5179582429216932, 0.5307157537060723, 0.5406684866381148]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.15 : [0.050762576826769865, 0.07165109034267912, 0.10258107213765719]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.15 : [0.6716867469879518, 0.8131313131313131, 0.7524271844660194]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.15 : [0.6353642948444823, 0.6381763953983809, 0.6403067746058798]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.15 : [array([0.7874387 , 0.38061774, 0.38061774, ..., 0.38061774, 0.38061774,
       0.38061774], dtype=float32), array([0.37410617, 0.37410617, 0.37410617, ..., 0.37410617, 0.37410617,
       0.5742907 ], dtype=float32), array([0.37409034, 0.37409034, 0.37409034, ..., 0.16955188, 0.37409034,
       0.37409034], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.15 : [0.1620583717357911, 0.17677444040558637, 0.1926657799733992]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.15 : [0.5770733611991281, 0.631903835914244, 0.6643434179980457]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.15 : [0.5177914110429448, 0.6302864938608458, 0.6945205479452055]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.15 : [0.09606191668563624, 0.102803738317757, 0.11184645929847783]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.15 : [0.628121005538986, 0.6333191308052833, 0.637920749893481]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.15 : [array([0.55695221, 0.38762603, 0.38534935, ..., 0.38762603, 0.38762603,
       0.38762603]), array([0.0479928 , 0.38776416, 0.38776416, ..., 0.68336366, 0.38776416,
       0.61637325]), array([0.38869105, 0.38869105, 0.38869105, ..., 0.20864805, 0.38869105,
       0.38869105])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.15 : [0.2013875867241703, 0.2395034684191311, 0.2864086096163861]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.15 : [0.533675125659597, 0.5503373984137084, 0.563020998836451]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.15 : [0.5712765957446808, 0.6666666666666666, 0.6718241042345277]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.15 : [0.12223992715684043, 0.14597240765465064, 0.18199867637326275]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.15 : [0.6370685982104815, 0.6449936088623776, 0.6496804431188752]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.455
Logistic F1-score 32.74366978841485
Logistic ROCAUC score: 57.88664754983648
Logistic Recall score: 21.410750737128602
Logistic Precision Score: 69.56521739130434
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[6913  413]
 [3465  944]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.67      0.94      0.78      7326
           1       0.70      0.21      0.33      4409

    accuracy                           0.67     11735
   macro avg       0.68      0.58      0.55     11735
weighted avg       0.68      0.67      0.61     11735


Logistic Accuracy Score 66.95355773327653
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.319110631942749 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.455
DCT F1-score 33.017325923504416
DCT ROCAUC score: 56.6831646384833
DCT Recall score: 22.907688818326154
DCT Precision Score: 59.0988882387361
DCT Confusion Matrix [[6627  699]
 [3399 1010]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.66      0.90      0.76      7326
           1       0.59      0.23      0.33      4409

    accuracy                           0.65     11735
   macro avg       0.63      0.57      0.55     11735
weighted avg       0.63      0.65      0.60     11735


DCT Accuracy Score 65.07882403067747
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  8.56610655784607 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.455
Naive F1-score 25.66985197676598
Naive ROCAUC score: 56.1097247477379
Naive Recall score: 15.536402812429124
Naive Precision Score: 73.8146551724138
Naive Confusion Matrix [[7083  243]
 [3724  685]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.66      0.97      0.78      7326
           1       0.74      0.16      0.26      4409

    accuracy                           0.66     11735
   macro avg       0.70      0.56      0.52     11735
weighted avg       0.69      0.66      0.58     11735


Naive Accuracy Score 66.1951427354069
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.02293086051940918 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.455
XGB F1-Score 21.211534739694212
XGB ROCAUC Score: 68.56098491376667
XGB Recall score: 72.29551451187335
XGB Precision Score: 12.429122249943298
XGB Confusion Matrix [[7116 3861]
 [ 210  548]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.97      0.65      0.78     10977
           1       0.12      0.72      0.21       758

    accuracy                           0.65     11735
   macro avg       0.55      0.69      0.49     11735
weighted avg       0.92      0.65      0.74     11735


XGB Accuracy Score 66.1951427354069
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  1.7383205890655518 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.455
RFC F1 score 33.41313269493844
RFC ROCAUC Score: 57.92645673571053
RFC Recall score: 67.89437109103544
RFC Precision Score: 22.159219777727376
RFC Confusion Matrix [[6864  462]
 [3432  977]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.67      0.94      0.78      7326
           1       0.68      0.22      0.33      4409

    accuracy                           0.67     11735
   macro avg       0.67      0.58      0.56     11735
weighted avg       0.67      0.67      0.61     11735


RFC Accuracy Score 66.8172134639966
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  2501.003429889679 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.15 : [array([0.55461446, 0.37644218, 0.33936103, ..., 0.37644218, 0.37644218,
       0.37644218]), array([0.26154957, 0.37404311, 0.37404311, ..., 0.43874059, 0.37404311,
       0.56296296]), array([0.3742486 , 0.3742486 , 0.36501845, ..., 0.20665144, 0.3742486 ,
       0.3742486 ]), array([0.38035301, 0.25849293, 0.38035301, ..., 0.21456495, 0.38035301,
       0.85077894])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.15 : [0.15722266560255388, 0.1842259006815969, 0.269815709429236, 0.3274366978841485]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.15 : [0.5295212697846546, 0.541025115535594, 0.5622014817684599, 0.5788664754983648]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.15 : [0.08968814022308218, 0.1052514463729417, 0.16633575998235164, 0.214107507371286]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.15 : [0.6365105008077544, 0.7379095163806553, 0.7140151515151515, 0.6956521739130435]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.15 : [0.6400511291009799, 0.6430336599914784, 0.6522368981678739, 0.6695355773327653]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.15 : [array([1.        , 0.38772298, 0.38772298, ..., 0.38772298, 0.38772298,
       0.38772298]), array([0.        , 0.38757155, 0.38757155, ..., 1.        , 0.38757155,
       0.38757155]), array([0.38876147, 0.38876147, 0.38876147, ..., 0.        , 0.38876147,
       0.38876147]), array([0.39270286, 0.        , 0.39270286, ..., 0.        , 0.39270286,
       1.        ])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.15 : [0.22345786272806253, 0.2408212980685575, 0.2910299003322259, 0.33017325923504415]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.15 : [0.5242197521712901, 0.5382538008756569, 0.5542059792568098, 0.566831646384833]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.15 : [0.1463692237650808, 0.15398308856252782, 0.19324950363997354, 0.22907688818326152]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.15 : [0.4720998531571219, 0.5522745411013568, 0.5891055817081372, 0.590988882387361]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.15 : [0.6191734128674904, 0.6282062207072859, 0.6363016616957818, 0.6507882403067746]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.15 : [array([0.38382667, 0.37867553, 0.30596811, ..., 0.37867553, 0.37867553,
       0.37867553]), array([0.17733063, 0.39271211, 0.37356175, ..., 0.48896508, 0.39271211,
       0.47779735]), array([0.37477369, 0.37477369, 0.38137696, ..., 0.03401302, 0.37477369,
       0.37477369]), array([0.37947407, 0.18723693, 0.37947407, ..., 0.12160939, 0.37947407,
       0.68477178])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.15 : [0.0943915343915344, 0.13169734151329243, 0.180547466511357, 0.2566985197676598]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.15 : [0.5179582429216932, 0.5307157537060723, 0.5406684866381148, 0.561097247477379]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.15 : [0.050762576826769865, 0.07165109034267912, 0.10258107213765719, 0.15536402812429123]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.15 : [0.6716867469879518, 0.8131313131313131, 0.7524271844660194, 0.7381465517241379]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.15 : [0.6353642948444823, 0.6381763953983809, 0.6403067746058798, 0.661951427354069]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.15 : [array([0.7874387 , 0.38061774, 0.38061774, ..., 0.38061774, 0.38061774,
       0.38061774], dtype=float32), array([0.37410617, 0.37410617, 0.37410617, ..., 0.37410617, 0.37410617,
       0.5742907 ], dtype=float32), array([0.37409034, 0.37409034, 0.37409034, ..., 0.16955188, 0.37409034,
       0.37409034], dtype=float32), array([0.3808448 , 0.2587626 , 0.3808448 , ..., 0.41706032, 0.3808448 ,
       0.7089985 ], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.15 : [0.1620583717357911, 0.17677444040558637, 0.1926657799733992, 0.21211534739694213]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.15 : [0.5770733611991281, 0.631903835914244, 0.6643434179980457, 0.6856098491376668]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.15 : [0.5177914110429448, 0.6302864938608458, 0.6945205479452055, 0.7229551451187335]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.15 : [0.09606191668563624, 0.102803738317757, 0.11184645929847783, 0.12429122249943297]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.15 : [0.628121005538986, 0.6333191308052833, 0.637920749893481, 0.6530890498508735]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.15 : [array([0.55695221, 0.38762603, 0.38534935, ..., 0.38762603, 0.38762603,
       0.38762603]), array([0.0479928 , 0.38776416, 0.38776416, ..., 0.68336366, 0.38776416,
       0.61637325]), array([0.38869105, 0.38869105, 0.38869105, ..., 0.20864805, 0.38869105,
       0.38869105]), array([0.39280534, 0.14236516, 0.39280534, ..., 0.04540024, 0.39280534,
       0.74838175])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.15 : [0.2013875867241703, 0.2395034684191311, 0.2864086096163861, 0.3341313269493844]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.15 : [0.533675125659597, 0.5503373984137084, 0.563020998836451, 0.5792645673571053]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.15 : [0.5712765957446808, 0.6666666666666666, 0.6718241042345277, 0.6789437109103544]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.15 : [0.12223992715684043, 0.14597240765465064, 0.18199867637326275, 0.22159219777727376]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.15 : [0.6370685982104815, 0.6449936088623776, 0.6496804431188752, 0.6681721346399659]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.565
Logistic F1-score 33.56760374832664
Logistic ROCAUC score: 58.29684708487457
Logistic Recall score: 21.794871794871796
Logistic Precision Score: 72.99854439592431
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[6762  371]
 [3599 1003]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.95      0.77      7133
           1       0.73      0.22      0.34      4602

    accuracy                           0.66     11735
   macro avg       0.69      0.58      0.55     11735
weighted avg       0.68      0.66      0.60     11735


Logistic Accuracy Score 66.16957818491692
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  1.0750877857208252 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.565
DCT F1-score 33.647206528562464
DCT ROCAUC score: 56.75435795443779
DCT Recall score: 23.294219904389397
DCT Precision Score: 60.564971751412436
DCT Confusion Matrix [[6435  698]
 [3530 1072]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.90      0.75      7133
           1       0.61      0.23      0.34      4602

    accuracy                           0.64     11735
   macro avg       0.63      0.57      0.54     11735
weighted avg       0.63      0.64      0.59     11735


DCT Accuracy Score 63.97102684277801
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  10.557778596878052 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.565
Naive F1-score 28.81089575694081
Naive ROCAUC score: 56.86059212821909
Naive Recall score: 17.926988265971318
Naive Precision Score: 73.33333333333333
Naive Confusion Matrix [[6833  300]
 [3777  825]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.96      0.77      7133
           1       0.73      0.18      0.29      4602

    accuracy                           0.65     11735
   macro avg       0.69      0.57      0.53     11735
weighted avg       0.68      0.65      0.58     11735


Naive Accuracy Score 65.25777588410737
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.021982431411743164 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.565
XGB F1-Score 22.648469199557365
XGB ROCAUC Score: 69.17058646078902
XGB Recall score: 74.8780487804878
XGB Precision Score: 13.342025206431988
XGB Confusion Matrix [[6927 3988]
 [ 206  614]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.97      0.63      0.77     10915
           1       0.13      0.75      0.23       820

    accuracy                           0.64     11735
   macro avg       0.55      0.69      0.50     11735
weighted avg       0.91      0.64      0.73     11735


XGB Accuracy Score 65.25777588410737
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  1.9946331977844238 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.565
RFC F1 score 34.65025906735752
RFC ROCAUC Score: 58.092504901440215
RFC Recall score: 67.97966963151208
RFC Precision Score: 23.25076053889613
RFC Confusion Matrix [[6629  504]
 [3532 1070]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.93      0.77      7133
           1       0.68      0.23      0.35      4602

    accuracy                           0.66     11735
   macro avg       0.67      0.58      0.56     11735
weighted avg       0.66      0.66      0.60     11735


RFC Accuracy Score 65.60715807413719
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  3219.777161836624 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.15 : [array([0.55461446, 0.37644218, 0.33936103, ..., 0.37644218, 0.37644218,
       0.37644218]), array([0.26154957, 0.37404311, 0.37404311, ..., 0.43874059, 0.37404311,
       0.56296296]), array([0.3742486 , 0.3742486 , 0.36501845, ..., 0.20665144, 0.3742486 ,
       0.3742486 ]), array([0.38035301, 0.25849293, 0.38035301, ..., 0.21456495, 0.38035301,
       0.85077894]), array([0.3782679 , 0.51688785, 0.3782679 , ..., 0.3782679 , 0.3782679 ,
       0.28281194])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.15 : [0.15722266560255388, 0.1842259006815969, 0.269815709429236, 0.3274366978841485, 0.3356760374832664]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.15 : [0.5295212697846546, 0.541025115535594, 0.5622014817684599, 0.5788664754983648, 0.5829684708487457]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.15 : [0.08968814022308218, 0.1052514463729417, 0.16633575998235164, 0.214107507371286, 0.21794871794871795]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.15 : [0.6365105008077544, 0.7379095163806553, 0.7140151515151515, 0.6956521739130435, 0.7299854439592431]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.15 : [0.6400511291009799, 0.6430336599914784, 0.6522368981678739, 0.6695355773327653, 0.6616957818491691]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.15 : [array([1.        , 0.38772298, 0.38772298, ..., 0.38772298, 0.38772298,
       0.38772298]), array([0.        , 0.38757155, 0.38757155, ..., 1.        , 0.38757155,
       0.38757155]), array([0.38876147, 0.38876147, 0.38876147, ..., 0.        , 0.38876147,
       0.38876147]), array([0.39270286, 0.        , 0.39270286, ..., 0.        , 0.39270286,
       1.        ]), array([0.39046368, 0.        , 0.39046368, ..., 0.39046368, 0.39046368,
       0.        ])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.15 : [0.22345786272806253, 0.2408212980685575, 0.2910299003322259, 0.33017325923504415, 0.3364720652856246]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.15 : [0.5242197521712901, 0.5382538008756569, 0.5542059792568098, 0.566831646384833, 0.567543579544378]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.15 : [0.1463692237650808, 0.15398308856252782, 0.19324950363997354, 0.22907688818326152, 0.23294219904389396]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.15 : [0.4720998531571219, 0.5522745411013568, 0.5891055817081372, 0.590988882387361, 0.6056497175141243]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.15 : [0.6191734128674904, 0.6282062207072859, 0.6363016616957818, 0.6507882403067746, 0.6397102684277801]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.15 : [array([0.38382667, 0.37867553, 0.30596811, ..., 0.37867553, 0.37867553,
       0.37867553]), array([0.17733063, 0.39271211, 0.37356175, ..., 0.48896508, 0.39271211,
       0.47779735]), array([0.37477369, 0.37477369, 0.38137696, ..., 0.03401302, 0.37477369,
       0.37477369]), array([0.37947407, 0.18723693, 0.37947407, ..., 0.12160939, 0.37947407,
       0.68477178]), array([0.3770221 , 0.37205731, 0.3770221 , ..., 0.3770221 , 0.3770221 ,
       0.31217735])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.15 : [0.0943915343915344, 0.13169734151329243, 0.180547466511357, 0.2566985197676598, 0.2881089575694081]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.15 : [0.5179582429216932, 0.5307157537060723, 0.5406684866381148, 0.561097247477379, 0.5686059212821909]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.15 : [0.050762576826769865, 0.07165109034267912, 0.10258107213765719, 0.15536402812429123, 0.17926988265971316]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.15 : [0.6716867469879518, 0.8131313131313131, 0.7524271844660194, 0.7381465517241379, 0.7333333333333333]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.15 : [0.6353642948444823, 0.6381763953983809, 0.6403067746058798, 0.661951427354069, 0.6525777588410737]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.15 : [array([0.7874387 , 0.38061774, 0.38061774, ..., 0.38061774, 0.38061774,
       0.38061774], dtype=float32), array([0.37410617, 0.37410617, 0.37410617, ..., 0.37410617, 0.37410617,
       0.5742907 ], dtype=float32), array([0.37409034, 0.37409034, 0.37409034, ..., 0.16955188, 0.37409034,
       0.37409034], dtype=float32), array([0.3808448 , 0.2587626 , 0.3808448 , ..., 0.41706032, 0.3808448 ,
       0.7089985 ], dtype=float32), array([0.37739983, 0.42028272, 0.37739983, ..., 0.37739983, 0.37739983,
       0.30582073], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.15 : [0.1620583717357911, 0.17677444040558637, 0.1926657799733992, 0.21211534739694213, 0.22648469199557364]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.15 : [0.5770733611991281, 0.631903835914244, 0.6643434179980457, 0.6856098491376668, 0.6917058646078902]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.15 : [0.5177914110429448, 0.6302864938608458, 0.6945205479452055, 0.7229551451187335, 0.748780487804878]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.15 : [0.09606191668563624, 0.102803738317757, 0.11184645929847783, 0.12429122249943297, 0.13342025206431987]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.15 : [0.628121005538986, 0.6333191308052833, 0.637920749893481, 0.6530890498508735, 0.6426075841499787]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.15 : [array([0.55695221, 0.38762603, 0.38534935, ..., 0.38762603, 0.38762603,
       0.38762603]), array([0.0479928 , 0.38776416, 0.38776416, ..., 0.68336366, 0.38776416,
       0.61637325]), array([0.38869105, 0.38869105, 0.38869105, ..., 0.20864805, 0.38869105,
       0.38869105]), array([0.39280534, 0.14236516, 0.39280534, ..., 0.04540024, 0.39280534,
       0.74838175]), array([0.39036259, 0.37812247, 0.39036259, ..., 0.39036259, 0.39036259,
       0.15169994])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.15 : [0.2013875867241703, 0.2395034684191311, 0.2864086096163861, 0.3341313269493844, 0.34650259067357514]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.15 : [0.533675125659597, 0.5503373984137084, 0.563020998836451, 0.5792645673571053, 0.5809250490144021]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.15 : [0.5712765957446808, 0.6666666666666666, 0.6718241042345277, 0.6789437109103544, 0.6797966963151207]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.15 : [0.12223992715684043, 0.14597240765465064, 0.18199867637326275, 0.22159219777727376, 0.2325076053889613]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.15 : [0.6370685982104815, 0.6449936088623776, 0.6496804431188752, 0.6681721346399659, 0.656071580741372]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.078
Logistic F1-score 20.657596371882082
Logistic ROCAUC score: 53.99086796163204
Logistic Recall score: 12.34919343906737
Logistic Precision Score: 63.13236313236313
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[11649   532]
 [ 6466   911]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.96      0.77     12181
           1       0.63      0.12      0.21      7377

    accuracy                           0.64     19558
   macro avg       0.64      0.54      0.49     19558
weighted avg       0.64      0.64      0.56     19558


Logistic Accuracy Score 64.21924532160752
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.3041543960571289 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.078
DCT F1-score 24.802705749718154
DCT ROCAUC score: 53.39860441948778
DCT Recall score: 16.402331571099364
DCT Precision Score: 50.84033613445378
DCT Confusion Matrix [[11011  1170]
 [ 6167  1210]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.90      0.75     12181
           1       0.51      0.16      0.25      7377

    accuracy                           0.62     19558
   macro avg       0.57      0.53      0.50     19558
weighted avg       0.59      0.62      0.56     19558


DCT Accuracy Score 62.485939257592804
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  1.0143170356750488 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.078
Naive F1-score 12.200221374984626
Naive ROCAUC score: 52.302773837262826
Naive Recall score: 6.723600379558086
Naive Precision Score: 65.78249336870027
Naive Confusion Matrix [[11923   258]
 [ 6881   496]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.98      0.77     12181
           1       0.66      0.07      0.12      7377

    accuracy                           0.63     19558
   macro avg       0.65      0.52      0.45     19558
weighted avg       0.64      0.63      0.53     19558


Naive Accuracy Score 63.49831271091113
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.02596306800842285 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.078
XGB F1-Score 18.265454953438798
XGB ROCAUC Score: 58.2890948678467
XGB Recall score: 52.994791666666664
XGB Precision Score: 11.034295784194118
XGB Confusion Matrix [[11459  6563]
 [  722   814]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.94      0.64      0.76     18022
           1       0.11      0.53      0.18      1536

    accuracy                           0.63     19558
   macro avg       0.53      0.58      0.47     19558
weighted avg       0.88      0.63      0.71     19558


XGB Accuracy Score 63.49831271091113
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  0.6462688446044922 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.078
RFC F1 score 21.559127945386482
RFC ROCAUC Score: 53.65543778209469
RFC Recall score: 57.41935483870968
RFC Precision Score: 13.270977362071305
RFC Confusion Matrix [[11455   726]
 [ 6398   979]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.94      0.76     12181
           1       0.57      0.13      0.22      7377

    accuracy                           0.64     19558
   macro avg       0.61      0.54      0.49     19558
weighted avg       0.62      0.64      0.56     19558


RFC Accuracy Score 63.575007669495854
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  359.0011417865753 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.25 : [array([0.39683577, 0.39683577, 0.4096315 , ..., 0.3101846 , 0.39683577,
       0.39683577])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.25 : [0.20657596371882084]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5399086796163204]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.25 : [0.12349193439067371]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.25 : [0.6313236313236313]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.25 : [0.6421924532160752]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.25 : [array([0.41359678, 0.41359678, 0.        , ..., 0.        , 0.41359678,
       0.41359678])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.25 : [0.24802705749718154]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5339860441948778]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.25 : [0.16402331571099363]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5084033613445378]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.25 : [0.624859392575928]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.25 : [array([0.3927225 , 0.40754881, 0.25479501, ..., 0.1399382 , 0.3927225 ,
       0.3927225 ])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.25 : [0.12200221374984625]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5230277383726283]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.25 : [0.06723600379558085]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.25 : [0.6578249336870027]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.25 : [0.6349831271091113]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.25 : [array([0.40002072, 0.40002072, 0.50371045, ..., 0.07546593, 0.40002072,
       0.40002072], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.25 : [0.18265454953438798]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.25 : [0.582890948678467]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5299479166666666]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.25 : [0.11034295784194117]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.25 : [0.6275181511401984]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.25 : [array([0.41402014, 0.41402014, 0.38016673, ..., 0.24649412, 0.41402014,
       0.41402014])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.25 : [0.21559127945386483]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5365543778209468]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5741935483870968]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.25 : [0.13270977362071304]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.25 : [0.6357500766949585]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.158
Logistic F1-score 24.75598935226264
Logistic ROCAUC score: 55.54589749330946
Logistic Recall score: 15.038404527691684
Logistic Precision Score: 69.96865203761755
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[11658   479]
 [ 6305  1116]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.96      0.77     12137
           1       0.70      0.15      0.25      7421

    accuracy                           0.65     19558
   macro avg       0.67      0.56      0.51     19558
weighted avg       0.67      0.65      0.57     19558


Logistic Accuracy Score 65.31342673074957
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.2563138008117676 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.158
DCT F1-score 28.244734202607823
DCT ROCAUC score: 54.786089508120575
DCT Recall score: 18.973184206980193
DCT Precision Score: 55.23734797959984
DCT Confusion Matrix [[10996  1141]
 [ 6013  1408]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.91      0.75     12137
           1       0.55      0.19      0.28      7421

    accuracy                           0.63     19558
   macro avg       0.60      0.55      0.52     19558
weighted avg       0.61      0.63      0.58     19558


DCT Accuracy Score 63.42161775232641
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  2.2589869499206543 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.158
Naive F1-score 16.206439165561317
Naive ROCAUC score: 53.70376485045961
Naive Recall score: 9.055383371513273
Naive Precision Score: 77.06422018348624
Naive Confusion Matrix [[11937   200]
 [ 6749   672]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.98      0.77     12137
           1       0.77      0.09      0.16      7421

    accuracy                           0.64     19558
   macro avg       0.70      0.54      0.47     19558
weighted avg       0.69      0.64      0.54     19558


Naive Accuracy Score 64.46978218631762
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.02696061134338379 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.158
XGB F1-Score 19.008359097675484
XGB ROCAUC Score: 63.56960463101835
XGB Recall score: 63.262195121951216
XGB Precision Score: 11.184476485648833
XGB Confusion Matrix [[11655  6591]
 [  482   830]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.96      0.64      0.77     18246
           1       0.11      0.63      0.19      1312

    accuracy                           0.64     19558
   macro avg       0.54      0.64      0.48     19558
weighted avg       0.90      0.64      0.73     19558


XGB Accuracy Score 64.46978218631762
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  0.879641056060791 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.158
RFC F1 score 27.519257148886776
RFC ROCAUC Score: 55.687913013310954
RFC Recall score: 63.42412451361867
RFC Precision Score: 17.57175582805552
RFC Confusion Matrix [[11385   752]
 [ 6117  1304]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.94      0.77     12137
           1       0.63      0.18      0.28      7421

    accuracy                           0.65     19558
   macro avg       0.64      0.56      0.52     19558
weighted avg       0.64      0.65      0.58     19558


RFC Accuracy Score 64.87882196543615
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  805.8201894760132 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.25 : [array([0.39683577, 0.39683577, 0.4096315 , ..., 0.3101846 , 0.39683577,
       0.39683577]), array([0.33972385, 0.3832611 , 0.29920206, ..., 0.3832611 , 0.3832611 ,
       0.3832611 ])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.25 : [0.20657596371882084, 0.24755989352262642]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5399086796163204, 0.5554589749330946]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.25 : [0.12349193439067371, 0.15038404527691684]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.25 : [0.6313236313236313, 0.6996865203761755]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.25 : [0.6421924532160752, 0.6531342673074957]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.25 : [array([0.41359678, 0.41359678, 0.        , ..., 0.        , 0.41359678,
       0.41359678]), array([0.29411765, 0.39544236, 0.        , ..., 0.39544236, 0.39544236,
       0.39544236])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.25 : [0.24802705749718154, 0.28244734202607824]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5339860441948778, 0.5478608950812057]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.25 : [0.16402331571099363, 0.18973184206980193]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5084033613445378, 0.5523734797959984]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.25 : [0.624859392575928, 0.6342161775232641]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.25 : [array([0.3927225 , 0.40754881, 0.25479501, ..., 0.1399382 , 0.3927225 ,
       0.3927225 ]), array([0.2686814 , 0.38252427, 0.12045923, ..., 0.4097148 , 0.38252427,
       0.38252427])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.25 : [0.12200221374984625, 0.16206439165561318]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5230277383726283, 0.5370376485045961]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.25 : [0.06723600379558085, 0.09055383371513273]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.25 : [0.6578249336870027, 0.7706422018348624]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.25 : [0.6349831271091113, 0.6446978218631761]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.25 : [array([0.40002072, 0.40002072, 0.50371045, ..., 0.07546593, 0.40002072,
       0.40002072], dtype=float32), array([0.3829987 , 0.3829987 , 0.15058646, ..., 0.3829987 , 0.3829987 ,
       0.3829987 ], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.25 : [0.18265454953438798, 0.19008359097675484]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.25 : [0.582890948678467, 0.6356960463101835]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5299479166666666, 0.6326219512195121]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.25 : [0.11034295784194117, 0.11184476485648834]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.25 : [0.6275181511401984, 0.6383577052868391]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.25 : [array([0.41402014, 0.41402014, 0.38016673, ..., 0.24649412, 0.41402014,
       0.41402014]), array([0.29694229, 0.39513803, 0.08524885, ..., 0.39513803, 0.39513803,
       0.39513803])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.25 : [0.21559127945386483, 0.2751925714888678]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5365543778209468, 0.5568791301331095]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5741935483870968, 0.6342412451361867]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.25 : [0.13270977362071304, 0.17571755828055519]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.25 : [0.6357500766949585, 0.6487882196543614]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.249
Logistic F1-score 28.005170185264973
Logistic ROCAUC score: 56.71070052030167
Logistic Recall score: 17.291832934291033
Logistic Precision Score: 73.61268403171007
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[11574   466]
 [ 6218  1300]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.96      0.78     12040
           1       0.74      0.17      0.28      7518

    accuracy                           0.66     19558
   macro avg       0.69      0.57      0.53     19558
weighted avg       0.68      0.66      0.59     19558


Logistic Accuracy Score 65.82472645464772
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.4587719440460205 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.249
DCT F1-score 29.45828390668248
DCT ROCAUC score: 55.30822150868923
DCT Recall score: 19.819100824687418
DCT Precision Score: 57.3518090839107
DCT Confusion Matrix [[10932  1108]
 [ 6028  1490]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.91      0.75     12040
           1       0.57      0.20      0.29      7518

    accuracy                           0.64     19558
   macro avg       0.61      0.55      0.52     19558
weighted avg       0.62      0.64      0.58     19558


DCT Accuracy Score 63.51365170262808
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  3.8238003253936768 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.249
Naive F1-score 17.80338664158043
Naive ROCAUC score: 54.08358698812773
Naive Recall score: 10.069167331737164
Naive Precision Score: 76.77484787018255
Naive Confusion Matrix [[11811   229]
 [ 6761   757]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.98      0.77     12040
           1       0.77      0.10      0.18      7518

    accuracy                           0.64     19558
   macro avg       0.70      0.54      0.47     19558
weighted avg       0.69      0.64      0.54     19558


Naive Accuracy Score 64.26014929951937
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.025930166244506836 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.249
XGB F1-Score 19.510513615994483
XGB ROCAUC Score: 67.67387064259815
XGB Recall score: 71.64556962025317
XGB Precision Score: 11.292897047086992
XGB Confusion Matrix [[11704  6669]
 [  336   849]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.97      0.64      0.77     18373
           1       0.11      0.72      0.20      1185

    accuracy                           0.64     19558
   macro avg       0.54      0.68      0.48     19558
weighted avg       0.92      0.64      0.73     19558


XGB Accuracy Score 64.26014929951937
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  1.0761187076568604 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.249
RFC F1 score 28.391432171356573
RFC ROCAUC Score: 56.275806281977516
RFC Recall score: 67.39780658025923
RFC Precision Score: 17.983506251662675
RFC Confusion Matrix [[11386   654]
 [ 6166  1352]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.95      0.77     12040
           1       0.67      0.18      0.28      7518

    accuracy                           0.65     19558
   macro avg       0.66      0.56      0.53     19558
weighted avg       0.66      0.65      0.58     19558


RFC Accuracy Score 65.12935883014623
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  1324.3893506526947 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.25 : [array([0.39683577, 0.39683577, 0.4096315 , ..., 0.3101846 , 0.39683577,
       0.39683577]), array([0.33972385, 0.3832611 , 0.29920206, ..., 0.3832611 , 0.3832611 ,
       0.3832611 ]), array([0.30839909, 0.15695041, 0.25308223, ..., 0.30383442, 0.37831357,
       0.83738372])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.25 : [0.20657596371882084, 0.24755989352262642, 0.2800517018526497]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5399086796163204, 0.5554589749330946, 0.5671070052030167]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.25 : [0.12349193439067371, 0.15038404527691684, 0.17291832934291035]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.25 : [0.6313236313236313, 0.6996865203761755, 0.7361268403171007]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.25 : [0.6421924532160752, 0.6531342673074957, 0.6582472645464772]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.25 : [array([0.41359678, 0.41359678, 0.        , ..., 0.        , 0.41359678,
       0.41359678]), array([0.29411765, 0.39544236, 0.        , ..., 0.39544236, 0.39544236,
       0.39544236]), array([0.3125    , 0.5       , 0.        , ..., 0.        , 0.39136359,
       1.        ])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.25 : [0.24802705749718154, 0.28244734202607824, 0.2945828390668248]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5339860441948778, 0.5478608950812057, 0.5530822150868923]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.25 : [0.16402331571099363, 0.18973184206980193, 0.19819100824687416]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5084033613445378, 0.5523734797959984, 0.573518090839107]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.25 : [0.624859392575928, 0.6342161775232641, 0.6351365170262808]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.25 : [array([0.3927225 , 0.40754881, 0.25479501, ..., 0.1399382 , 0.3927225 ,
       0.3927225 ]), array([0.2686814 , 0.38252427, 0.12045923, ..., 0.4097148 , 0.38252427,
       0.38252427]), array([0.18193916, 0.07163447, 0.08536297, ..., 0.23014059, 0.37573797,
       0.55415128])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.25 : [0.12200221374984625, 0.16206439165561318, 0.17803386641580432]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5230277383726283, 0.5370376485045961, 0.5408358698812773]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.25 : [0.06723600379558085, 0.09055383371513273, 0.10069167331737164]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.25 : [0.6578249336870027, 0.7706422018348624, 0.7677484787018256]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.25 : [0.6349831271091113, 0.6446978218631761, 0.6426014929951938]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.25 : [array([0.40002072, 0.40002072, 0.50371045, ..., 0.07546593, 0.40002072,
       0.40002072], dtype=float32), array([0.3829987 , 0.3829987 , 0.15058646, ..., 0.3829987 , 0.3829987 ,
       0.3829987 ], dtype=float32), array([0.34665462, 0.0619026 , 0.1096007 , ..., 0.30043373, 0.3790851 ,
       0.9185003 ], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.25 : [0.18265454953438798, 0.19008359097675484, 0.19510513615994485]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.25 : [0.582890948678467, 0.6356960463101835, 0.6767387064259814]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5299479166666666, 0.6326219512195121, 0.7164556962025317]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.25 : [0.11034295784194117, 0.11184476485648834, 0.11292897047086992]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.25 : [0.6275181511401984, 0.6383577052868391, 0.6418345434093465]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.25 : [array([0.41402014, 0.41402014, 0.38016673, ..., 0.24649412, 0.41402014,
       0.41402014]), array([0.29694229, 0.39513803, 0.08524885, ..., 0.39513803, 0.39513803,
       0.39513803]), array([0.30952502, 0.11651697, 0.13688349, ..., 0.12656824, 0.39139562,
       0.7985    ])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.25 : [0.21559127945386483, 0.2751925714888678, 0.28391432171356573]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5365543778209468, 0.5568791301331095, 0.5627580628197751]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5741935483870968, 0.6342412451361867, 0.6739780658025922]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.25 : [0.13270977362071304, 0.17571755828055519, 0.17983506251662676]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.25 : [0.6357500766949585, 0.6487882196543614, 0.6512935883014623]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.333
Logistic F1-score 29.765780905367084
Logistic ROCAUC score: 56.84364596083409
Logistic Recall score: 18.987002545893073
Logistic Precision Score: 68.85325558794946
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[11454   641]
 [ 6046  1417]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.95      0.77     12095
           1       0.69      0.19      0.30      7463

    accuracy                           0.66     19558
   macro avg       0.67      0.57      0.54     19558
weighted avg       0.67      0.66      0.59     19558


Logistic Accuracy Score 65.80938746293077
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.5485324859619141 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.333
DCT F1-score 30.445057109098066
DCT ROCAUC score: 55.616136201651166
DCT Recall score: 20.715529947742194
DCT Precision Score: 57.40809506126996
DCT Confusion Matrix [[10948  1147]
 [ 5917  1546]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.91      0.76     12095
           1       0.57      0.21      0.30      7463

    accuracy                           0.64     19558
   macro avg       0.61      0.56      0.53     19558
weighted avg       0.62      0.64      0.58     19558


DCT Accuracy Score 63.88178750383475
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  5.742468595504761 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.333
Naive F1-score 22.049937293353096
Naive ROCAUC score: 55.06895447886021
Naive Recall score: 12.9572557952566
Naive Precision Score: 73.92966360856269
Naive Confusion Matrix [[11754   341]
 [ 6496   967]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.97      0.77     12095
           1       0.74      0.13      0.22      7463

    accuracy                           0.65     19558
   macro avg       0.69      0.55      0.50     19558
weighted avg       0.68      0.65      0.56     19558


Naive Accuracy Score 65.04243787708354
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.031914472579956055 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.333
XGB F1-Score 19.505972399396963
XGB ROCAUC Score: 68.2534786389825
XGB Recall score: 72.5
XGB Precision Score: 11.268926705078387
XGB Confusion Matrix [[11776  6622]
 [  319   841]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.97      0.64      0.77     18398
           1       0.11      0.72      0.20      1160

    accuracy                           0.65     19558
   macro avg       0.54      0.68      0.48     19558
weighted avg       0.92      0.65      0.74     19558


XGB Accuracy Score 65.04243787708354
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  1.3753178119659424 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.333
RFC F1 score 29.637327236828437
RFC ROCAUC Score: 56.51948704140371
RFC Recall score: 66.01851851851852
RFC Precision Score: 19.107597480905802
RFC Confusion Matrix [[11361   734]
 [ 6037  1426]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.94      0.77     12095
           1       0.66      0.19      0.30      7463

    accuracy                           0.65     19558
   macro avg       0.66      0.57      0.53     19558
weighted avg       0.66      0.65      0.59     19558


RFC Accuracy Score 65.37989569485633
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  1857.9842376708984 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.25 : [array([0.39683577, 0.39683577, 0.4096315 , ..., 0.3101846 , 0.39683577,
       0.39683577]), array([0.33972385, 0.3832611 , 0.29920206, ..., 0.3832611 , 0.3832611 ,
       0.3832611 ]), array([0.30839909, 0.15695041, 0.25308223, ..., 0.30383442, 0.37831357,
       0.83738372]), array([0.3820336 , 0.3820336 , 0.27162649, ..., 0.3820336 , 0.45953314,
       0.63303788])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.25 : [0.20657596371882084, 0.24755989352262642, 0.2800517018526497, 0.29765780905367084]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5399086796163204, 0.5554589749330946, 0.5671070052030167, 0.5684364596083409]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.25 : [0.12349193439067371, 0.15038404527691684, 0.17291832934291035, 0.18987002545893072]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.25 : [0.6313236313236313, 0.6996865203761755, 0.7361268403171007, 0.6885325558794947]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.25 : [0.6421924532160752, 0.6531342673074957, 0.6582472645464772, 0.6580938746293077]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.25 : [array([0.41359678, 0.41359678, 0.        , ..., 0.        , 0.41359678,
       0.41359678]), array([0.29411765, 0.39544236, 0.        , ..., 0.39544236, 0.39544236,
       0.39544236]), array([0.3125    , 0.5       , 0.        , ..., 0.        , 0.39136359,
       1.        ]), array([0.39649771, 0.39649771, 0.        , ..., 0.39649771, 1.        ,
       0.66666667])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.25 : [0.24802705749718154, 0.28244734202607824, 0.2945828390668248, 0.30445057109098067]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5339860441948778, 0.5478608950812057, 0.5530822150868923, 0.5561613620165117]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.25 : [0.16402331571099363, 0.18973184206980193, 0.19819100824687416, 0.20715529947742195]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5084033613445378, 0.5523734797959984, 0.573518090839107, 0.5740809506126996]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.25 : [0.624859392575928, 0.6342161775232641, 0.6351365170262808, 0.6388178750383475]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.25 : [array([0.3927225 , 0.40754881, 0.25479501, ..., 0.1399382 , 0.3927225 ,
       0.3927225 ]), array([0.2686814 , 0.38252427, 0.12045923, ..., 0.4097148 , 0.38252427,
       0.38252427]), array([0.18193916, 0.07163447, 0.08536297, ..., 0.23014059, 0.37573797,
       0.55415128]), array([0.37996161, 0.46732155, 0.19457178, ..., 0.37996161, 0.36037   ,
       0.44258667])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.25 : [0.12200221374984625, 0.16206439165561318, 0.17803386641580432, 0.22049937293353095]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5230277383726283, 0.5370376485045961, 0.5408358698812773, 0.5506895447886021]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.25 : [0.06723600379558085, 0.09055383371513273, 0.10069167331737164, 0.129572557952566]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.25 : [0.6578249336870027, 0.7706422018348624, 0.7677484787018256, 0.7392966360856269]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.25 : [0.6349831271091113, 0.6446978218631761, 0.6426014929951938, 0.6504243787708355]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.25 : [array([0.40002072, 0.40002072, 0.50371045, ..., 0.07546593, 0.40002072,
       0.40002072], dtype=float32), array([0.3829987 , 0.3829987 , 0.15058646, ..., 0.3829987 , 0.3829987 ,
       0.3829987 ], dtype=float32), array([0.34665462, 0.0619026 , 0.1096007 , ..., 0.30043373, 0.3790851 ,
       0.9185003 ], dtype=float32), array([0.3824724 , 0.3824724 , 0.3824724 , ..., 0.3824724 , 0.50826234,
       0.45741278], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.25 : [0.18265454953438798, 0.19008359097675484, 0.19510513615994485, 0.19505972399396965]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.25 : [0.582890948678467, 0.6356960463101835, 0.6767387064259814, 0.682534786389825]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5299479166666666, 0.6326219512195121, 0.7164556962025317, 0.725]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.25 : [0.11034295784194117, 0.11184476485648834, 0.11292897047086992, 0.11268926705078387]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.25 : [0.6275181511401984, 0.6383577052868391, 0.6418345434093465, 0.6451068616422947]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.25 : [array([0.41402014, 0.41402014, 0.38016673, ..., 0.24649412, 0.41402014,
       0.41402014]), array([0.29694229, 0.39513803, 0.08524885, ..., 0.39513803, 0.39513803,
       0.39513803]), array([0.30952502, 0.11651697, 0.13688349, ..., 0.12656824, 0.39139562,
       0.7985    ]), array([0.39655065, 0.39655065, 0.11815838, ..., 0.39655065, 0.41705437,
       0.6539469 ])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.25 : [0.21559127945386483, 0.2751925714888678, 0.28391432171356573, 0.29637327236828437]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5365543778209468, 0.5568791301331095, 0.5627580628197751, 0.565194870414037]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5741935483870968, 0.6342412451361867, 0.6739780658025922, 0.6601851851851852]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.25 : [0.13270977362071304, 0.17571755828055519, 0.17983506251662676, 0.19107597480905802]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.25 : [0.6357500766949585, 0.6487882196543614, 0.6512935883014623, 0.6537989569485633]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.442
Logistic F1-score 32.13689482470785
Logistic ROCAUC score: 57.89790269830901
Logistic Recall score: 20.65450643776824
Logistic Precision Score: 72.36842105263158
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[11514   588]
 [ 5916  1540]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.66      0.95      0.78     12102
           1       0.72      0.21      0.32      7456

    accuracy                           0.67     19558
   macro avg       0.69      0.58      0.55     19558
weighted avg       0.68      0.67      0.61     19558


Logistic Accuracy Score 66.74506595766438
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.7709023952484131 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.442
DCT F1-score 32.412847630238936
DCT ROCAUC score: 56.54960930268682
DCT Recall score: 22.196888412017167
DCT Precision Score: 60.05079825834543
DCT Confusion Matrix [[11001  1101]
 [ 5801  1655]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.91      0.76     12102
           1       0.60      0.22      0.32      7456

    accuracy                           0.65     19558
   macro avg       0.63      0.57      0.54     19558
weighted avg       0.63      0.65      0.59     19558


DCT Accuracy Score 64.71009305654974
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  7.96371865272522 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.442
Naive F1-score 26.3430777716492
Naive ROCAUC score: 56.292381619609564
Naive Recall score: 16.013948497854077
Naive Precision Score: 74.20758234928527
Naive Confusion Matrix [[11687   415]
 [ 6262  1194]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.97      0.78     12102
           1       0.74      0.16      0.26      7456

    accuracy                           0.66     19558
   macro avg       0.70      0.56      0.52     19558
weighted avg       0.69      0.66      0.58     19558


Naive Accuracy Score 65.86051743532059
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.028915882110595703 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.442
XGB F1-Score 21.440882454326097
XGB ROCAUC Score: 69.59808559383654
XGB Recall score: 74.8195669607057
XGB Precision Score: 12.513412017167383
XGB Confusion Matrix [[11788  6523]
 [  314   933]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.97      0.64      0.78     18311
           1       0.13      0.75      0.21      1247

    accuracy                           0.65     19558
   macro avg       0.55      0.70      0.49     19558
weighted avg       0.92      0.65      0.74     19558


XGB Accuracy Score 65.86051743532059
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  1.665506362915039 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.442
RFC F1 score 32.76143790849673
RFC ROCAUC Score: 57.7321442630346
RFC Recall score: 68.66438356164383
RFC Precision Score: 21.512875536480685
RFC Confusion Matrix [[11370   732]
 [ 5852  1604]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.66      0.94      0.78     12102
           1       0.69      0.22      0.33      7456

    accuracy                           0.66     19558
   macro avg       0.67      0.58      0.55     19558
weighted avg       0.67      0.66      0.60     19558


RFC Accuracy Score 66.33602617854586
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  2466.5753741264343 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.25 : [array([0.39683577, 0.39683577, 0.4096315 , ..., 0.3101846 , 0.39683577,
       0.39683577]), array([0.33972385, 0.3832611 , 0.29920206, ..., 0.3832611 , 0.3832611 ,
       0.3832611 ]), array([0.30839909, 0.15695041, 0.25308223, ..., 0.30383442, 0.37831357,
       0.83738372]), array([0.3820336 , 0.3820336 , 0.27162649, ..., 0.3820336 , 0.45953314,
       0.63303788]), array([0.3704691 , 0.4144327 , 0.37974232, ..., 0.55380972, 0.5165736 ,
       0.24636812])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.25 : [0.20657596371882084, 0.24755989352262642, 0.2800517018526497, 0.29765780905367084, 0.3213689482470785]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5399086796163204, 0.5554589749330946, 0.5671070052030167, 0.5684364596083409, 0.5789790269830901]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.25 : [0.12349193439067371, 0.15038404527691684, 0.17291832934291035, 0.18987002545893072, 0.2065450643776824]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.25 : [0.6313236313236313, 0.6996865203761755, 0.7361268403171007, 0.6885325558794947, 0.7236842105263158]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.25 : [0.6421924532160752, 0.6531342673074957, 0.6582472645464772, 0.6580938746293077, 0.6674506595766438]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.25 : [array([0.41359678, 0.41359678, 0.        , ..., 0.        , 0.41359678,
       0.41359678]), array([0.29411765, 0.39544236, 0.        , ..., 0.39544236, 0.39544236,
       0.39544236]), array([0.3125    , 0.5       , 0.        , ..., 0.        , 0.39136359,
       1.        ]), array([0.39649771, 0.39649771, 0.        , ..., 0.39649771, 1.        ,
       0.66666667]), array([0.        , 0.40277778, 0.39346728, ..., 0.        , 1.        ,
       0.        ])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.25 : [0.24802705749718154, 0.28244734202607824, 0.2945828390668248, 0.30445057109098067, 0.3241284763023894]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5339860441948778, 0.5478608950812057, 0.5530822150868923, 0.5561613620165117, 0.5654960930268682]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.25 : [0.16402331571099363, 0.18973184206980193, 0.19819100824687416, 0.20715529947742195, 0.22196888412017168]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5084033613445378, 0.5523734797959984, 0.573518090839107, 0.5740809506126996, 0.6005079825834543]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.25 : [0.624859392575928, 0.6342161775232641, 0.6351365170262808, 0.6388178750383475, 0.6471009305654974]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.25 : [array([0.3927225 , 0.40754881, 0.25479501, ..., 0.1399382 , 0.3927225 ,
       0.3927225 ]), array([0.2686814 , 0.38252427, 0.12045923, ..., 0.4097148 , 0.38252427,
       0.38252427]), array([0.18193916, 0.07163447, 0.08536297, ..., 0.23014059, 0.37573797,
       0.55415128]), array([0.37996161, 0.46732155, 0.19457178, ..., 0.37996161, 0.36037   ,
       0.44258667]), array([0.27085209, 0.35714957, 0.37851751, ..., 0.43630288, 0.68950426,
       0.19561654])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.25 : [0.12200221374984625, 0.16206439165561318, 0.17803386641580432, 0.22049937293353095, 0.263430777716492]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5230277383726283, 0.5370376485045961, 0.5408358698812773, 0.5506895447886021, 0.5629238161960957]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.25 : [0.06723600379558085, 0.09055383371513273, 0.10069167331737164, 0.129572557952566, 0.16013948497854077]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.25 : [0.6578249336870027, 0.7706422018348624, 0.7677484787018256, 0.7392966360856269, 0.7420758234928527]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.25 : [0.6349831271091113, 0.6446978218631761, 0.6426014929951938, 0.6504243787708355, 0.6586051743532059]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.25 : [array([0.40002072, 0.40002072, 0.50371045, ..., 0.07546593, 0.40002072,
       0.40002072], dtype=float32), array([0.3829987 , 0.3829987 , 0.15058646, ..., 0.3829987 , 0.3829987 ,
       0.3829987 ], dtype=float32), array([0.34665462, 0.0619026 , 0.1096007 , ..., 0.30043373, 0.3790851 ,
       0.9185003 ], dtype=float32), array([0.3824724 , 0.3824724 , 0.3824724 , ..., 0.3824724 , 0.50826234,
       0.45741278], dtype=float32), array([0.3784848, 0.3784848, 0.3784848, ..., 0.5213466, 0.3784848,
       0.3784848], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.25 : [0.18265454953438798, 0.19008359097675484, 0.19510513615994485, 0.19505972399396965, 0.21440882454326096]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.25 : [0.582890948678467, 0.6356960463101835, 0.6767387064259814, 0.682534786389825, 0.6959808559383655]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5299479166666666, 0.6326219512195121, 0.7164556962025317, 0.725, 0.748195669607057]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.25 : [0.11034295784194117, 0.11184476485648834, 0.11292897047086992, 0.11268926705078387, 0.12513412017167383]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.25 : [0.6275181511401984, 0.6383577052868391, 0.6418345434093465, 0.6451068616422947, 0.6504243787708355]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.25 : [array([0.41402014, 0.41402014, 0.38016673, ..., 0.24649412, 0.41402014,
       0.41402014]), array([0.29694229, 0.39513803, 0.08524885, ..., 0.39513803, 0.39513803,
       0.39513803]), array([0.30952502, 0.11651697, 0.13688349, ..., 0.12656824, 0.39139562,
       0.7985    ]), array([0.39655065, 0.39655065, 0.11815838, ..., 0.39655065, 0.41705437,
       0.6539469 ]), array([0.252     , 0.40412742, 0.39334062, ..., 0.61366667, 0.78282336,
       0.18164198])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.25 : [0.21559127945386483, 0.2751925714888678, 0.28391432171356573, 0.29637327236828437, 0.3276143790849673]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5365543778209468, 0.5568791301331095, 0.5627580628197751, 0.565194870414037, 0.577321442630346]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.25 : [0.5741935483870968, 0.6342412451361867, 0.6739780658025922, 0.6601851851851852, 0.6866438356164384]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.25 : [0.13270977362071304, 0.17571755828055519, 0.17983506251662676, 0.19107597480905802, 0.21512875536480686]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.25 : [0.6357500766949585, 0.6487882196543614, 0.6512935883014623, 0.6537989569485633, 0.6633602617854586]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.1
Logistic F1-score 17.751280544126292
Logistic ROCAUC score: 53.632497091833386
Logistic Recall score: 10.21256038647343
Logistic Precision Score: 67.7998717126363
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[16529   502]
 [ 9293  1057]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.97      0.77     17031
           1       0.68      0.10      0.18     10350

    accuracy                           0.64     27381
   macro avg       0.66      0.54      0.47     27381
weighted avg       0.65      0.64      0.55     27381


Logistic Accuracy Score 64.2270187356196
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.3928959369659424 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.1
DCT F1-score 25.827912477823773
DCT ROCAUC score: 54.23845094069723
DCT Recall score: 16.8792270531401
DCT Precision Score: 54.97168030207678
DCT Confusion Matrix [[15600  1431]
 [ 8603  1747]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.92      0.76     17031
           1       0.55      0.17      0.26     10350

    accuracy                           0.63     27381
   macro avg       0.60      0.54      0.51     27381
weighted avg       0.61      0.63      0.57     27381


DCT Accuracy Score 63.354150688433585
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  1.4142472743988037 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.1
Naive F1-score 10.000896137646741
Naive ROCAUC score: 51.958760623211376
Naive Recall score: 5.391304347826087
Naive Precision Score: 68.97404202719407
Naive Confusion Matrix [[16780   251]
 [ 9792   558]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.99      0.77     17031
           1       0.69      0.05      0.10     10350

    accuracy                           0.63     27381
   macro avg       0.66      0.52      0.43     27381
weighted avg       0.65      0.63      0.52     27381


Naive Accuracy Score 63.32128118038055
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.03793191909790039 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.1
XGB F1-Score 17.374677861833902
XGB ROCAUC Score: 63.01800996800782
XGB Recall score: 62.23942823108993
XGB Precision Score: 10.096618357487923
XGB Confusion Matrix [[16397  9305]
 [  634  1045]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.96      0.64      0.77     25702
           1       0.10      0.62      0.17      1679

    accuracy                           0.64     27381
   macro avg       0.53      0.63      0.47     27381
weighted avg       0.91      0.64      0.73     27381


XGB Accuracy Score 63.32128118038055
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  0.7061071395874023 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.1
RFC F1 score 22.94182217343578
RFC ROCAUC Score: 54.3050234908381
RFC Recall score: 60.856905158069885
RFC Precision Score: 14.13526570048309
RFC Confusion Matrix [[16090   941]
 [ 8887  1463]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.94      0.77     17031
           1       0.61      0.14      0.23     10350

    accuracy                           0.64     27381
   macro avg       0.63      0.54      0.50     27381
weighted avg       0.63      0.64      0.56     27381


RFC Accuracy Score 64.10649720609182
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  526.5138721466064 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.35 : [array([0.37468502, 0.37468502, 0.37468502, ..., 0.37468502, 0.17640145,
       0.37468502])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.35 : [0.1775128054412629]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.35 : [0.5363249709183339]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.35 : [0.1021256038647343]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6779987171263631]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6422701873561959]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.35 : [array([0.3873465, 0.3873465, 0.3873465, ..., 0.3873465, 0.       ,
       0.3873465])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.35 : [0.2582791247782377]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.35 : [0.5423845094069722]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.35 : [0.16879227053140097]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.35 : [0.5497168030207678]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6335415068843359]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.35 : [array([0.37100486, 0.37100486, 0.37100486, ..., 0.37100486, 0.06303275,
       0.37100486])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.35 : [0.10000896137646742]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.35 : [0.5195876062321138]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.35 : [0.05391304347826087]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6897404202719407]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6332128118038055]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.35 : [array([0.37656155, 0.37656155, 0.37656155, ..., 0.37656155, 0.06537795,
       0.37656155], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.35 : [0.17374677861833904]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6301800996800782]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6223942823108993]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.35 : [0.10096618357487923]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6370110660677112]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.35 : [array([0.38736942, 0.38736942, 0.38736942, ..., 0.38736942, 0.17217289,
       0.38736942])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.35 : [0.22941822173435783]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.35 : [0.543050234908381]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6085690515806988]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.35 : [0.1413526570048309]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6410649720609182]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.125
Logistic F1-score 23.488500750810086
Logistic ROCAUC score: 54.97117616447075
Logistic Recall score: 14.233716475095786
Logistic Precision Score: 67.14866696791685
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[16214   727]
 [ 8954  1486]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.96      0.77     16941
           1       0.67      0.14      0.23     10440

    accuracy                           0.65     27381
   macro avg       0.66      0.55      0.50     27381
weighted avg       0.65      0.65      0.57     27381


Logistic Accuracy Score 64.64336583762463
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.18350815773010254 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.125
DCT F1-score 27.843584986442128
DCT ROCAUC score: 54.55371566769593
DCT Recall score: 18.68773946360153
DCT Precision Score: 54.58869613878008
DCT Confusion Matrix [[15318  1623]
 [ 8489  1951]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.90      0.75     16941
           1       0.55      0.19      0.28     10440

    accuracy                           0.63     27381
   macro avg       0.59      0.55      0.52     27381
weighted avg       0.61      0.63      0.57     27381


DCT Accuracy Score 63.06928161864066
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  1.809035062789917 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.125
Naive F1-score 14.4249849020792
Naive ROCAUC score: 53.074134233278855
Naive Recall score: 8.007662835249043
Naive Precision Score: 72.63249348392702
Naive Confusion Matrix [[16626   315]
 [ 9604   836]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.98      0.77     16941
           1       0.73      0.08      0.14     10440

    accuracy                           0.64     27381
   macro avg       0.68      0.53      0.46     27381
weighted avg       0.67      0.64      0.53     27381


Naive Accuracy Score 63.77414995800007
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.035923004150390625 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.125
XGB F1-Score 18.95249695493301
XGB ROCAUC Score: 62.94192425311692
XGB Recall score: 62.239999999999995
XGB Precision Score: 11.178160919540229
XGB Confusion Matrix [[16233  9273]
 [  708  1167]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.96      0.64      0.76     25506
           1       0.11      0.62      0.19      1875

    accuracy                           0.64     27381
   macro avg       0.53      0.63      0.48     27381
weighted avg       0.90      0.64      0.73     27381


XGB Accuracy Score 63.77414995800007
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  0.8330793380737305 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.125
RFC F1 score 26.137566137566136
RFC ROCAUC Score: 55.14919511054932
RFC Recall score: 61.971326164874554
RFC Precision Score: 16.561302681992338
RFC Confusion Matrix [[15880  1061]
 [ 8711  1729]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.94      0.76     16941
           1       0.62      0.17      0.26     10440

    accuracy                           0.64     27381
   macro avg       0.63      0.55      0.51     27381
weighted avg       0.64      0.64      0.57     27381


RFC Accuracy Score 64.31101858953289
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  650.9080982208252 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.35 : [array([0.37468502, 0.37468502, 0.37468502, ..., 0.37468502, 0.17640145,
       0.37468502]), array([0.38167624, 0.38167624, 0.38167624, ..., 0.53934681, 0.38167624,
       0.26939297])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.35 : [0.1775128054412629, 0.23488500750810085]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.35 : [0.5363249709183339, 0.5497117616447075]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.35 : [0.1021256038647343, 0.14233716475095787]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6779987171263631, 0.6714866696791686]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6422701873561959, 0.6464336583762463]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.35 : [array([0.3873465, 0.3873465, 0.3873465, ..., 0.3873465, 0.       ,
       0.3873465]), array([0.39470339, 0.39470339, 0.39470339, ..., 1.        , 0.39470339,
       0.        ])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.35 : [0.2582791247782377, 0.27843584986442127]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.35 : [0.5423845094069722, 0.5455371566769593]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.35 : [0.16879227053140097, 0.18687739463601533]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.35 : [0.5497168030207678, 0.5458869613878008]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6335415068843359, 0.6306928161864066]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.35 : [array([0.37100486, 0.37100486, 0.37100486, ..., 0.37100486, 0.06303275,
       0.37100486]), array([0.38034363, 0.38034363, 0.40342225, ..., 0.36525693, 0.38034363,
       0.11519248])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.35 : [0.10000896137646742, 0.144249849020792]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.35 : [0.5195876062321138, 0.5307413423327886]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.35 : [0.05391304347826087, 0.08007662835249042]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6897404202719407, 0.7263249348392702]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6332128118038055, 0.6377414995800007]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.35 : [array([0.37656155, 0.37656155, 0.37656155, ..., 0.37656155, 0.06537795,
       0.37656155], dtype=float32), array([0.38421038, 0.38421038, 0.38421038, ..., 0.41221297, 0.38421038,
       0.21780644], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.35 : [0.17374677861833904, 0.1895249695493301]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6301800996800782, 0.6294192425311692]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6223942823108993, 0.6224]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.35 : [0.10096618357487923, 0.1117816091954023]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6370110660677112, 0.6354771556919031]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.35 : [array([0.38736942, 0.38736942, 0.38736942, ..., 0.38736942, 0.17217289,
       0.38736942]), array([0.3946761 , 0.3946761 , 0.3946761 , ..., 0.43169307, 0.3946761 ,
       0.14663951])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.35 : [0.22941822173435783, 0.2613756613756614]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.35 : [0.543050234908381, 0.5514919511054932]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6085690515806988, 0.6197132616487455]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.35 : [0.1413526570048309, 0.16561302681992338]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6410649720609182, 0.6431101858953289]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.215
Logistic F1-score 27.734496727952635
Logistic ROCAUC score: 56.53031041782257
Logistic Recall score: 17.19474497681607
Logistic Precision Score: 71.65861513687601
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[16325   704]
 [ 8572  1780]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.66      0.96      0.78     17029
           1       0.72      0.17      0.28     10352

    accuracy                           0.66     27381
   macro avg       0.69      0.57      0.53     27381
weighted avg       0.68      0.66      0.59     27381


Logistic Accuracy Score 66.12249370001095
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.19843792915344238 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.215
DCT F1-score 30.77686419053019
DCT ROCAUC score: 55.83207061860016
DCT Recall score: 20.97179289026275
DCT Precision Score: 57.80085197018104
DCT Confusion Matrix [[15444  1585]
 [ 8181  2171]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.91      0.76     17029
           1       0.58      0.21      0.31     10352

    accuracy                           0.64     27381
   macro avg       0.62      0.56      0.53     27381
weighted avg       0.63      0.64      0.59     27381


DCT Accuracy Score 64.33293159490158
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  3.2503018379211426 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.215
Naive F1-score 18.65992414664981
Naive ROCAUC score: 54.15470879841943
Naive Recall score: 10.693585780525503
Naive Precision Score: 73.16589557171183
Naive Confusion Matrix [[16623   406]
 [ 9245  1107]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.98      0.78     17029
           1       0.73      0.11      0.19     10352

    accuracy                           0.65     27381
   macro avg       0.69      0.54      0.48     27381
weighted avg       0.68      0.65      0.55     27381


Naive Accuracy Score 64.75293086446806
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.03194880485534668 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.215
XGB F1-Score 21.325742171614475
XGB ROCAUC Score: 65.9658318933702
XGB Recall score: 67.47297992794647
XGB Precision Score: 12.664219474497681
XGB Confusion Matrix [[16397  9041]
 [  632  1311]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.96      0.64      0.77     25438
           1       0.13      0.67      0.21      1943

    accuracy                           0.65     27381
   macro avg       0.54      0.66      0.49     27381
weighted avg       0.90      0.65      0.73     27381


XGB Accuracy Score 64.75293086446806
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  1.0063056945800781 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.215
RFC F1 score 29.514097180563887
RFC ROCAUC Score: 56.522263185367116
RFC Recall score: 65.95174262734585
RFC Precision Score: 19.01081916537867
RFC Confusion Matrix [[16013  1016]
 [ 8384  1968]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.66      0.94      0.77     17029
           1       0.66      0.19      0.30     10352

    accuracy                           0.66     27381
   macro avg       0.66      0.57      0.53     27381
weighted avg       0.66      0.66      0.59     27381


RFC Accuracy Score 65.66962492239144
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  1179.6924571990967 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.35 : [array([0.37468502, 0.37468502, 0.37468502, ..., 0.37468502, 0.17640145,
       0.37468502]), array([0.38167624, 0.38167624, 0.38167624, ..., 0.53934681, 0.38167624,
       0.26939297]), array([0.287709  , 0.38192059, 0.20516123, ..., 0.38192059, 0.4668899 ,
       0.26039839])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.35 : [0.1775128054412629, 0.23488500750810085, 0.27734496727952634]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.35 : [0.5363249709183339, 0.5497117616447075, 0.5653031041782257]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.35 : [0.1021256038647343, 0.14233716475095787, 0.17194744976816073]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6779987171263631, 0.6714866696791686, 0.71658615136876]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6422701873561959, 0.6464336583762463, 0.6612249370001095]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.35 : [array([0.3873465, 0.3873465, 0.3873465, ..., 0.3873465, 0.       ,
       0.3873465]), array([0.39470339, 0.39470339, 0.39470339, ..., 1.        , 0.39470339,
       0.        ]), array([0.25806452, 0.39807026, 0.        , ..., 0.39807026, 0.45      ,
       0.        ])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.35 : [0.2582791247782377, 0.27843584986442127, 0.3077686419053019]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.35 : [0.5423845094069722, 0.5455371566769593, 0.5583207061860016]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.35 : [0.16879227053140097, 0.18687739463601533, 0.2097179289026275]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.35 : [0.5497168030207678, 0.5458869613878008, 0.5780085197018104]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6335415068843359, 0.6306928161864066, 0.6433293159490158]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.35 : [array([0.37100486, 0.37100486, 0.37100486, ..., 0.37100486, 0.06303275,
       0.37100486]), array([0.38034363, 0.38034363, 0.40342225, ..., 0.36525693, 0.38034363,
       0.11519248]), array([0.24285689, 0.37957072, 0.12541651, ..., 0.37957072, 0.35946938,
       0.09882903])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.35 : [0.10000896137646742, 0.144249849020792, 0.18659924146649812]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.35 : [0.5195876062321138, 0.5307413423327886, 0.5415470879841943]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.35 : [0.05391304347826087, 0.08007662835249042, 0.10693585780525502]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6897404202719407, 0.7263249348392702, 0.7316589557171183]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6332128118038055, 0.6377414995800007, 0.6475293086446806]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.35 : [array([0.37656155, 0.37656155, 0.37656155, ..., 0.37656155, 0.06537795,
       0.37656155], dtype=float32), array([0.38421038, 0.38421038, 0.38421038, ..., 0.41221297, 0.38421038,
       0.21780644], dtype=float32), array([0.38205996, 0.38205996, 0.38205996, ..., 0.38205996, 0.38205996,
       0.1662405 ], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.35 : [0.17374677861833904, 0.1895249695493301, 0.21325742171614476]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6301800996800782, 0.6294192425311692, 0.659658318933702]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6223942823108993, 0.6224, 0.6747297992794647]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.35 : [0.10096618357487923, 0.1117816091954023, 0.12664219474497682]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6370110660677112, 0.6354771556919031, 0.6467258317811622]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.35 : [array([0.38736942, 0.38736942, 0.38736942, ..., 0.38736942, 0.17217289,
       0.38736942]), array([0.3946761 , 0.3946761 , 0.3946761 , ..., 0.43169307, 0.3946761 ,
       0.14663951]), array([0.25715773, 0.39801913, 0.01271402, ..., 0.39801913, 0.44784057,
       0.13351492])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.35 : [0.22941822173435783, 0.2613756613756614, 0.29514097180563886]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.35 : [0.543050234908381, 0.5514919511054932, 0.5652226318536712]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6085690515806988, 0.6197132616487455, 0.6595174262734584]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.35 : [0.1413526570048309, 0.16561302681992338, 0.1901081916537867]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6410649720609182, 0.6431101858953289, 0.6566962492239143]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.269
Logistic F1-score 30.32973712201793
Logistic ROCAUC score: 57.27301962232831
Logistic Recall score: 19.258973369355463
Logistic Precision Score: 71.33666904932095
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[16215   802]
 [ 8368  1996]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.66      0.95      0.78     17017
           1       0.71      0.19      0.30     10364

    accuracy                           0.67     27381
   macro avg       0.69      0.57      0.54     27381
weighted avg       0.68      0.67      0.60     27381


Logistic Accuracy Score 66.50962346152441
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.5654850006103516 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.269
DCT F1-score 31.264595570023353
DCT ROCAUC score: 56.07930704163137
DCT Recall score: 21.314164415283674
DCT Precision Score: 58.64082824528802
DCT Confusion Matrix [[15459  1558]
 [ 8155  2209]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.91      0.76     17017
           1       0.59      0.21      0.31     10364

    accuracy                           0.65     27381
   macro avg       0.62      0.56      0.54     27381
weighted avg       0.63      0.65      0.59     27381


DCT Accuracy Score 64.5264964756583
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  4.365316867828369 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.269
Naive F1-score 22.819447837771804
Naive ROCAUC score: 55.24871891792454
Naive Recall score: 13.517946738710924
Naive Precision Score: 73.15926892950392
Naive Confusion Matrix [[16503   514]
 [ 8963  1401]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.97      0.78     17017
           1       0.73      0.14      0.23     10364

    accuracy                           0.65     27381
   macro avg       0.69      0.55      0.50     27381
weighted avg       0.68      0.65      0.57     27381


Naive Accuracy Score 65.38840802015996
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.03989362716674805 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.269
XGB F1-Score 21.597392013039933
XGB ROCAUC Score: 67.01773440001976
XGB Recall score: 69.51731374606506
XGB Precision Score: 12.78463913546893
XGB Confusion Matrix [[16436  9039]
 [  581  1325]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.97      0.65      0.77     25475
           1       0.13      0.70      0.22      1906

    accuracy                           0.65     27381
   macro avg       0.55      0.67      0.49     27381
weighted avg       0.91      0.65      0.73     27381


XGB Accuracy Score 65.38840802015996
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  1.2257189750671387 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.269
RFC F1 score 31.598375784422295
RFC ROCAUC Score: 57.265493151024515
RFC Recall score: 67.27444199937128
RFC Precision Score: 20.648398301813973
RFC Confusion Matrix [[15976  1041]
 [ 8224  2140]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.66      0.94      0.78     17017
           1       0.67      0.21      0.32     10364

    accuracy                           0.66     27381
   macro avg       0.67      0.57      0.55     27381
weighted avg       0.66      0.66      0.60     27381


RFC Accuracy Score 66.16266754318688
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  1576.4757013320923 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.35 : [array([0.37468502, 0.37468502, 0.37468502, ..., 0.37468502, 0.17640145,
       0.37468502]), array([0.38167624, 0.38167624, 0.38167624, ..., 0.53934681, 0.38167624,
       0.26939297]), array([0.287709  , 0.38192059, 0.20516123, ..., 0.38192059, 0.4668899 ,
       0.26039839]), array([0.48166119, 0.50913009, 0.38851974, ..., 0.47066392, 0.38459229,
       0.33416389])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.35 : [0.1775128054412629, 0.23488500750810085, 0.27734496727952634, 0.3032973712201793]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.35 : [0.5363249709183339, 0.5497117616447075, 0.5653031041782257, 0.5727301962232831]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.35 : [0.1021256038647343, 0.14233716475095787, 0.17194744976816073, 0.19258973369355462]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6779987171263631, 0.6714866696791686, 0.71658615136876, 0.7133666904932094]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6422701873561959, 0.6464336583762463, 0.6612249370001095, 0.6650962346152441]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.35 : [array([0.3873465, 0.3873465, 0.3873465, ..., 0.3873465, 0.       ,
       0.3873465]), array([0.39470339, 0.39470339, 0.39470339, ..., 1.        , 0.39470339,
       0.        ]), array([0.25806452, 0.39807026, 0.        , ..., 0.39807026, 0.45      ,
       0.        ]), array([0.39911374, 0.66666667, 0.        , ..., 1.        , 0.39911374,
       0.33898305])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.35 : [0.2582791247782377, 0.27843584986442127, 0.3077686419053019, 0.3126459557002335]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.35 : [0.5423845094069722, 0.5455371566769593, 0.5583207061860016, 0.5607930704163137]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.35 : [0.16879227053140097, 0.18687739463601533, 0.2097179289026275, 0.21314164415283673]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.35 : [0.5497168030207678, 0.5458869613878008, 0.5780085197018104, 0.5864082824528802]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6335415068843359, 0.6306928161864066, 0.6433293159490158, 0.645264964756583]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.35 : [array([0.37100486, 0.37100486, 0.37100486, ..., 0.37100486, 0.06303275,
       0.37100486]), array([0.38034363, 0.38034363, 0.40342225, ..., 0.36525693, 0.38034363,
       0.11519248]), array([0.24285689, 0.37957072, 0.12541651, ..., 0.37957072, 0.35946938,
       0.09882903]), array([0.56054886, 0.51207114, 0.46006051, ..., 0.4257997 , 0.38487858,
       0.26805848])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.35 : [0.10000896137646742, 0.144249849020792, 0.18659924146649812, 0.22819447837771806]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.35 : [0.5195876062321138, 0.5307413423327886, 0.5415470879841943, 0.5524871891792454]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.35 : [0.05391304347826087, 0.08007662835249042, 0.10693585780525502, 0.13517946738710923]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6897404202719407, 0.7263249348392702, 0.7316589557171183, 0.7315926892950392]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6332128118038055, 0.6377414995800007, 0.6475293086446806, 0.6538840802015996]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.35 : [array([0.37656155, 0.37656155, 0.37656155, ..., 0.37656155, 0.06537795,
       0.37656155], dtype=float32), array([0.38421038, 0.38421038, 0.38421038, ..., 0.41221297, 0.38421038,
       0.21780644], dtype=float32), array([0.38205996, 0.38205996, 0.38205996, ..., 0.38205996, 0.38205996,
       0.1662405 ], dtype=float32), array([0.38515046, 0.38515046, 0.38515046, ..., 0.38515046, 0.38515046,
       0.38515046], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.35 : [0.17374677861833904, 0.1895249695493301, 0.21325742171614476, 0.21597392013039934]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6301800996800782, 0.6294192425311692, 0.659658318933702, 0.6701773440001977]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6223942823108993, 0.6224, 0.6747297992794647, 0.6951731374606506]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.35 : [0.10096618357487923, 0.1117816091954023, 0.12664219474497682, 0.1278463913546893]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6370110660677112, 0.6354771556919031, 0.6467258317811622, 0.6486614805887294]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.35 : [array([0.38736942, 0.38736942, 0.38736942, ..., 0.38736942, 0.17217289,
       0.38736942]), array([0.3946761 , 0.3946761 , 0.3946761 , ..., 0.43169307, 0.3946761 ,
       0.14663951]), array([0.25715773, 0.39801913, 0.01271402, ..., 0.39801913, 0.44784057,
       0.13351492]), array([0.58589743, 0.66386047, 0.29131682, ..., 0.86496362, 0.39897062,
       0.33879828])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.35 : [0.22941822173435783, 0.2613756613756614, 0.29514097180563886, 0.31598375784422295]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.35 : [0.543050234908381, 0.5514919511054932, 0.5652226318536712, 0.5726549315102452]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6085690515806988, 0.6197132616487455, 0.6595174262734584, 0.6727444199937127]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.35 : [0.1413526570048309, 0.16561302681992338, 0.1901081916537867, 0.20648398301813972]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6410649720609182, 0.6431101858953289, 0.6566962492239143, 0.6616266754318688]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.33
Logistic F1-score 30.166831720880626
Logistic ROCAUC score: 57.315915419849425
Logistic Recall score: 19.042123485285632
Logistic Precision Score: 72.55404910223525
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[16234   749]
 [ 8418  1980]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.66      0.96      0.78     16983
           1       0.73      0.19      0.30     10398

    accuracy                           0.67     27381
   macro avg       0.69      0.57      0.54     27381
weighted avg       0.68      0.67      0.60     27381


Logistic Accuracy Score 66.52057996420876
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.2952144145965576 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.33
DCT F1-score 31.83777291033703
DCT ROCAUC score: 56.41174506708603
DCT Recall score: 21.667628390075013
DCT Precision Score: 60.0
DCT Confusion Matrix [[15481  1502]
 [ 8145  2253]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.66      0.91      0.76     16983
           1       0.60      0.22      0.32     10398

    accuracy                           0.65     27381
   macro avg       0.63      0.56      0.54     27381
weighted avg       0.63      0.65      0.59     27381


DCT Accuracy Score 64.76753953471385
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  5.715701341629028 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.33
Naive F1-score 23.112631321768873
Naive ROCAUC score: 55.46324386910246
Naive Recall score: 13.646855164454703
Naive Precision Score: 75.43859649122807
Naive Confusion Matrix [[16521   462]
 [ 8979  1419]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.97      0.78     16983
           1       0.75      0.14      0.23     10398

    accuracy                           0.66     27381
   macro avg       0.70      0.55      0.50     27381
weighted avg       0.69      0.66      0.57     27381


Naive Accuracy Score 65.51988605237207
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.038895606994628906 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.33
XGB F1-Score 20.355225113589423
XGB ROCAUC Score: 68.23595787276263
XGB Recall score: 72.1734036321031
XGB Precision Score: 11.848432390844394
XGB Confusion Matrix [[16508  9166]
 [  475  1232]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.97      0.64      0.77     25674
           1       0.12      0.72      0.20      1707

    accuracy                           0.65     27381
   macro avg       0.55      0.68      0.49     27381
weighted avg       0.92      0.65      0.74     27381


XGB Accuracy Score 65.51988605237207
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  1.401249885559082 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.33
RFC F1 score 31.008097466755814
RFC ROCAUC Score: 57.16212206911776
RFC Recall score: 68.13581456088802
RFC Precision Score: 20.071167532217736
RFC Confusion Matrix [[16007   976]
 [ 8311  2087]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.66      0.94      0.78     16983
           1       0.68      0.20      0.31     10398

    accuracy                           0.66     27381
   macro avg       0.67      0.57      0.54     27381
weighted avg       0.67      0.66      0.60     27381


RFC Accuracy Score 66.08231985683504
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  1989.0501449108124 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.35 : [array([0.37468502, 0.37468502, 0.37468502, ..., 0.37468502, 0.17640145,
       0.37468502]), array([0.38167624, 0.38167624, 0.38167624, ..., 0.53934681, 0.38167624,
       0.26939297]), array([0.287709  , 0.38192059, 0.20516123, ..., 0.38192059, 0.4668899 ,
       0.26039839]), array([0.48166119, 0.50913009, 0.38851974, ..., 0.47066392, 0.38459229,
       0.33416389]), array([0.38164584, 0.38164584, 0.22516341, ..., 0.38164584, 0.2752452 ,
       0.38164584])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.35 : [0.1775128054412629, 0.23488500750810085, 0.27734496727952634, 0.3032973712201793, 0.30166831720880627]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.35 : [0.5363249709183339, 0.5497117616447075, 0.5653031041782257, 0.5727301962232831, 0.5731591541984943]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.35 : [0.1021256038647343, 0.14233716475095787, 0.17194744976816073, 0.19258973369355462, 0.1904212348528563]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6779987171263631, 0.6714866696791686, 0.71658615136876, 0.7133666904932094, 0.7255404910223525]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6422701873561959, 0.6464336583762463, 0.6612249370001095, 0.6650962346152441, 0.6652057996420876]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.35 : [array([0.3873465, 0.3873465, 0.3873465, ..., 0.3873465, 0.       ,
       0.3873465]), array([0.39470339, 0.39470339, 0.39470339, ..., 1.        , 0.39470339,
       0.        ]), array([0.25806452, 0.39807026, 0.        , ..., 0.39807026, 0.45      ,
       0.        ]), array([0.39911374, 0.66666667, 0.        , ..., 1.        , 0.39911374,
       0.33898305]), array([0.39710145, 0.39710145, 0.        , ..., 0.39710145, 0.        ,
       0.39710145])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.35 : [0.2582791247782377, 0.27843584986442127, 0.3077686419053019, 0.3126459557002335, 0.3183777291033703]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.35 : [0.5423845094069722, 0.5455371566769593, 0.5583207061860016, 0.5607930704163137, 0.5641174506708603]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.35 : [0.16879227053140097, 0.18687739463601533, 0.2097179289026275, 0.21314164415283673, 0.21667628390075014]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.35 : [0.5497168030207678, 0.5458869613878008, 0.5780085197018104, 0.5864082824528802, 0.6]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6335415068843359, 0.6306928161864066, 0.6433293159490158, 0.645264964756583, 0.6476753953471385]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.35 : [array([0.37100486, 0.37100486, 0.37100486, ..., 0.37100486, 0.06303275,
       0.37100486]), array([0.38034363, 0.38034363, 0.40342225, ..., 0.36525693, 0.38034363,
       0.11519248]), array([0.24285689, 0.37957072, 0.12541651, ..., 0.37957072, 0.35946938,
       0.09882903]), array([0.56054886, 0.51207114, 0.46006051, ..., 0.4257997 , 0.38487858,
       0.26805848]), array([0.38039899, 0.38039899, 0.14786711, ..., 0.38039899, 0.31132917,
       0.38039899])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.35 : [0.10000896137646742, 0.144249849020792, 0.18659924146649812, 0.22819447837771806, 0.23112631321768873]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.35 : [0.5195876062321138, 0.5307413423327886, 0.5415470879841943, 0.5524871891792454, 0.5546324386910246]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.35 : [0.05391304347826087, 0.08007662835249042, 0.10693585780525502, 0.13517946738710923, 0.13646855164454702]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6897404202719407, 0.7263249348392702, 0.7316589557171183, 0.7315926892950392, 0.7543859649122807]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6332128118038055, 0.6377414995800007, 0.6475293086446806, 0.6538840802015996, 0.6551988605237208]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.35 : [array([0.37656155, 0.37656155, 0.37656155, ..., 0.37656155, 0.06537795,
       0.37656155], dtype=float32), array([0.38421038, 0.38421038, 0.38421038, ..., 0.41221297, 0.38421038,
       0.21780644], dtype=float32), array([0.38205996, 0.38205996, 0.38205996, ..., 0.38205996, 0.38205996,
       0.1662405 ], dtype=float32), array([0.38515046, 0.38515046, 0.38515046, ..., 0.38515046, 0.38515046,
       0.38515046], dtype=float32), array([0.3819988 , 0.3819988 , 0.3819988 , ..., 0.3819988 , 0.13221636,
       0.3819988 ], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.35 : [0.17374677861833904, 0.1895249695493301, 0.21325742171614476, 0.21597392013039934, 0.20355225113589423]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6301800996800782, 0.6294192425311692, 0.659658318933702, 0.6701773440001977, 0.6823595787276263]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6223942823108993, 0.6224, 0.6747297992794647, 0.6951731374606506, 0.7217340363210311]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.35 : [0.10096618357487923, 0.1117816091954023, 0.12664219474497682, 0.1278463913546893, 0.11848432390844393]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6370110660677112, 0.6354771556919031, 0.6467258317811622, 0.6486614805887294, 0.6478945254008254]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.35 : [array([0.38736942, 0.38736942, 0.38736942, ..., 0.38736942, 0.17217289,
       0.38736942]), array([0.3946761 , 0.3946761 , 0.3946761 , ..., 0.43169307, 0.3946761 ,
       0.14663951]), array([0.25715773, 0.39801913, 0.01271402, ..., 0.39801913, 0.44784057,
       0.13351492]), array([0.58589743, 0.66386047, 0.29131682, ..., 0.86496362, 0.39897062,
       0.33879828]), array([0.39694818, 0.39694818, 0.1221567 , ..., 0.39694818, 0.08171101,
       0.39694818])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.35 : [0.22941822173435783, 0.2613756613756614, 0.29514097180563886, 0.31598375784422295, 0.31008097466755813]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.35 : [0.543050234908381, 0.5514919511054932, 0.5652226318536712, 0.5726549315102452, 0.5716212206911776]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6085690515806988, 0.6197132616487455, 0.6595174262734584, 0.6727444199937127, 0.6813581456088802]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.35 : [0.1413526570048309, 0.16561302681992338, 0.1901081916537867, 0.20648398301813972, 0.20071167532217735]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.35 : [0.6410649720609182, 0.6431101858953289, 0.6566962492239143, 0.6616266754318688, 0.6608231985683504]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.1
Logistic F1-score 19.137776640654984
Logistic ROCAUC score: 53.922163936776194
Logistic Recall score: 11.149202563720376
Logistic Precision Score: 67.50902527075813
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[21066   720]
 [11922  1496]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.97      0.77     21786
           1       0.68      0.11      0.19     13418

    accuracy                           0.64     35204
   macro avg       0.66      0.54      0.48     35204
weighted avg       0.65      0.64      0.55     35204


Logistic Accuracy Score 64.08930803317804
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.2622997760772705 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.1
DCT F1-score 25.5717021516278
DCT ROCAUC score: 53.71720954478308
DCT Recall score: 16.917573408853777
DCT Precision Score: 52.352398523985244
DCT Confusion Matrix [[19720  2066]
 [11148  2270]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.91      0.75     21786
           1       0.52      0.17      0.26     13418

    accuracy                           0.62     35204
   macro avg       0.58      0.54      0.50     35204
weighted avg       0.59      0.62      0.56     35204


DCT Accuracy Score 62.46449267128735
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  1.7084290981292725 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.1
Naive F1-score 10.752392097473669
Naive ROCAUC score: 52.157492774092994
Naive Recall score: 5.82053957370696
Naive Precision Score: 70.42380522993687
Naive Confusion Matrix [[21458   328]
 [12637   781]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.98      0.77     21786
           1       0.70      0.06      0.11     13418

    accuracy                           0.63     35204
   macro avg       0.67      0.52      0.44     35204
weighted avg       0.66      0.63      0.52     35204


Naive Accuracy Score 63.17179865924327
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.046874284744262695 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.1
XGB F1-Score 19.574042845543687
XGB ROCAUC Score: 62.04571676009326
XGB Recall score: 60.43193212495179
XGB Precision Score: 11.678342524966464
XGB Confusion Matrix [[20760 11851]
 [ 1026  1567]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.64      0.76     32611
           1       0.12      0.60      0.20      2593

    accuracy                           0.63     35204
   macro avg       0.53      0.62      0.48     35204
weighted avg       0.89      0.63      0.72     35204


XGB Accuracy Score 63.17179865924327
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  0.7868926525115967 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.1
RFC F1 score 23.555609051516612
RFC ROCAUC Score: 54.44428361863062
RFC Recall score: 61.19449656035022
RFC Precision Score: 14.58488597406469
RFC Confusion Matrix [[20545  1241]
 [11461  1957]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.94      0.76     21786
           1       0.61      0.15      0.24     13418

    accuracy                           0.64     35204
   macro avg       0.63      0.54      0.50     35204
weighted avg       0.63      0.64      0.56     35204


RFC Accuracy Score 63.91887285535734
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  581.2981083393097 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.45 : [array([0.37268984, 0.37268984, 0.37268984, ..., 0.37268984, 0.37268984,
       0.37268984])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.45 : [0.19137776640654985]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.45 : [0.5392216393677619]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.45 : [0.11149202563720376]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6750902527075813]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6408930803317805]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.45 : [array([0.38361612, 0.38361612, 0.38361612, ..., 0.38361612, 0.38361612,
       0.38361612])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.45 : [0.255717021516278]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.45 : [0.5371720954478308]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.45 : [0.16917573408853778]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.45 : [0.5235239852398524]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6246449267128735]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.45 : [array([0.37202761, 0.37202761, 0.37202761, ..., 0.37202761, 0.37202761,
       0.40005868])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.45 : [0.10752392097473669]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.45 : [0.52157492774093]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.45 : [0.05820539573706961]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.45 : [0.7042380522993688]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6317179865924327]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.45 : [array([0.37311947, 0.37311947, 0.37311947, ..., 0.37311947, 0.37311947,
       0.37311947], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.45 : [0.19574042845543688]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6204571676009326]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6043193212495179]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.45 : [0.11678342524966463]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6342177025338029]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.45 : [array([0.38365994, 0.38365994, 0.38365994, ..., 0.38365994, 0.38365994,
       0.38365994])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.45 : [0.23555609051516613]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.45 : [0.5444428361863062]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6119449656035022]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.45 : [0.1458488597406469]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6391887285535734]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.195
Logistic F1-score 27.006815029250347
Logistic ROCAUC score: 56.13329319412529
Logistic Recall score: 16.757727714991393
Logistic Precision Score: 69.53416149068323
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[20862   981]
 [11122  2239]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.96      0.78     21843
           1       0.70      0.17      0.27     13361

    accuracy                           0.66     35204
   macro avg       0.67      0.56      0.52     35204
weighted avg       0.67      0.66      0.58     35204


Logistic Accuracy Score 65.62038404726735
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.21442580223083496 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.195
DCT F1-score 28.943143442396057
DCT ROCAUC score: 55.002638684186444
DCT Recall score: 19.564403861986378
DCT Precision Score: 55.59336452573373
DCT Confusion Matrix [[19755  2088]
 [10747  2614]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.90      0.75     21843
           1       0.56      0.20      0.29     13361

    accuracy                           0.64     35204
   macro avg       0.60      0.55      0.52     35204
weighted avg       0.61      0.64      0.58     35204


DCT Accuracy Score 63.54107487785478
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  3.2054221630096436 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.195
Naive F1-score 17.801184990125083
Naive ROCAUC score: 53.967618551209576
Naive Recall score: 10.119003068632587
Naive Precision Score: 73.92017495899398
Naive Confusion Matrix [[21366   477]
 [12009  1352]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.98      0.77     21843
           1       0.74      0.10      0.18     13361

    accuracy                           0.65     35204
   macro avg       0.69      0.54      0.48     35204
weighted avg       0.68      0.65      0.55     35204


Naive Accuracy Score 64.53243949551187
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.04591035842895508 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.195
XGB F1-Score 19.93503598496911
XGB ROCAUC Score: 65.49348155360812
XGB Recall score: 66.88034188034187
XGB Precision Score: 11.71319512012574
XGB Confusion Matrix [[21068 11796]
 [  775  1565]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.96      0.64      0.77     32864
           1       0.12      0.67      0.20      2340

    accuracy                           0.64     35204
   macro avg       0.54      0.65      0.48     35204
weighted avg       0.91      0.64      0.73     35204


XGB Accuracy Score 64.53243949551187
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  1.0063064098358154 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.195
RFC F1 score 28.20110433013659
RFC ROCAUC Score: 55.83277064464263
RFC Recall score: 63.11134235171696
RFC Precision Score: 18.157323553626227
RFC Confusion Matrix [[20425  1418]
 [10935  2426]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.94      0.77     21843
           1       0.63      0.18      0.28     13361

    accuracy                           0.65     35204
   macro avg       0.64      0.56      0.52     35204
weighted avg       0.64      0.65      0.58     35204


RFC Accuracy Score 64.91023747301443
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  1171.9132778644562 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.45 : [array([0.37268984, 0.37268984, 0.37268984, ..., 0.37268984, 0.37268984,
       0.37268984]), array([0.38218112, 0.59086418, 0.38218112, ..., 0.38218112, 0.38218112,
       0.38218112])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.45 : [0.19137776640654985, 0.2700681502925035]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.45 : [0.5392216393677619, 0.5613329319412529]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.45 : [0.11149202563720376, 0.16757727714991394]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6750902527075813, 0.6953416149068323]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6408930803317805, 0.6562038404726735]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.45 : [array([0.38361612, 0.38361612, 0.38361612, ..., 0.38361612, 0.38361612,
       0.38361612]), array([0.39392702, 1.        , 0.39392702, ..., 0.39392702, 0.39392702,
       0.39392702])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.45 : [0.255717021516278, 0.2894314344239606]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.45 : [0.5371720954478308, 0.5500263868418644]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.45 : [0.16917573408853778, 0.1956440386198638]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.45 : [0.5235239852398524, 0.5559336452573373]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6246449267128735, 0.6354107487785479]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.45 : [array([0.37202761, 0.37202761, 0.37202761, ..., 0.37202761, 0.37202761,
       0.40005868]), array([0.3808837 , 0.37274264, 0.3808837 , ..., 0.3808837 , 0.3808837 ,
       0.3808837 ])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.45 : [0.10752392097473669, 0.17801184990125082]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.45 : [0.52157492774093, 0.5396761855120957]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.45 : [0.05820539573706961, 0.10119003068632587]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.45 : [0.7042380522993688, 0.7392017495899399]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6317179865924327, 0.6453243949551187]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.45 : [array([0.37311947, 0.37311947, 0.37311947, ..., 0.37311947, 0.37311947,
       0.37311947], dtype=float32), array([0.38365665, 0.76604736, 0.38365665, ..., 0.38365665, 0.38365665,
       0.38365665], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.45 : [0.19574042845543688, 0.1993503598496911]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6204571676009326, 0.6549348155360812]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6043193212495179, 0.6688034188034188]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.45 : [0.11678342524966463, 0.1171319512012574]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6342177025338029, 0.6429098966026587]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.45 : [array([0.38365994, 0.38365994, 0.38365994, ..., 0.38365994, 0.38365994,
       0.38365994]), array([0.39390033, 0.5133901 , 0.39390033, ..., 0.39390033, 0.39390033,
       0.39390033])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.45 : [0.23555609051516613, 0.2820110433013659]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.45 : [0.5444428361863062, 0.5583277064464263]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6119449656035022, 0.6311134235171696]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.45 : [0.1458488597406469, 0.18157323553626226]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6391887285535734, 0.6491023747301443]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.215
Logistic F1-score 26.984413552386112
Logistic ROCAUC score: 56.01628587950533
Logistic Recall score: 16.822990920687324
Logistic Precision Score: 68.14589665653496
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[20829  1048]
 [11085  2242]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.95      0.77     21877
           1       0.68      0.17      0.27     13327

    accuracy                           0.66     35204
   macro avg       0.67      0.56      0.52     35204
weighted avg       0.66      0.66      0.58     35204


Logistic Accuracy Score 65.53516645835701
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.2851834297180176 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.215
DCT F1-score 29.79050126137984
DCT ROCAUC score: 55.182298006509434
DCT Recall score: 20.37968034816538
DCT Precision Score: 55.349500713266764
DCT Confusion Matrix [[19686  2191]
 [10611  2716]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.90      0.75     21877
           1       0.55      0.20      0.30     13327

    accuracy                           0.64     35204
   macro avg       0.60      0.55      0.53     35204
weighted avg       0.61      0.64      0.58     35204


DCT Accuracy Score 63.63481422565618
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  3.504619836807251 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.215
Naive F1-score 18.84105311295486
Naive ROCAUC score: 54.18046791817465
Naive Recall score: 10.82013956629399
Naive Precision Score: 72.82828282828284
Naive Confusion Matrix [[21339   538]
 [11885  1442]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.98      0.77     21877
           1       0.73      0.11      0.19     13327

    accuracy                           0.65     35204
   macro avg       0.69      0.54      0.48     35204
weighted avg       0.67      0.65      0.55     35204


Naive Accuracy Score 64.71139643222361
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.0498654842376709 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.215
XGB F1-Score 21.2153585119085
XGB ROCAUC Score: 64.79590172147654
XGB Recall score: 65.27455529775715
XGB Precision Score: 12.66601635776994
XGB Confusion Matrix [[20979 11639]
 [  898  1688]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.96      0.64      0.77     32618
           1       0.13      0.65      0.21      2586

    accuracy                           0.64     35204
   macro avg       0.54      0.65      0.49     35204
weighted avg       0.90      0.64      0.73     35204


XGB Accuracy Score 64.71139643222361
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  1.1000556945800781 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.215
RFC F1 score 29.336410848240046
RFC ROCAUC Score: 56.19790680913517
RFC Recall score: 63.50237322008494
RFC Precision Score: 19.07406017858483
RFC Confusion Matrix [[20416  1461]
 [10785  2542]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.93      0.77     21877
           1       0.64      0.19      0.29     13327

    accuracy                           0.65     35204
   macro avg       0.64      0.56      0.53     35204
weighted avg       0.65      0.65      0.59     35204


RFC Accuracy Score 65.21418020679468
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  1247.3649971485138 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.45 : [array([0.37268984, 0.37268984, 0.37268984, ..., 0.37268984, 0.37268984,
       0.37268984]), array([0.38218112, 0.59086418, 0.38218112, ..., 0.38218112, 0.38218112,
       0.38218112]), array([0.17122382, 0.48759222, 0.41501093, ..., 0.43010795, 0.38137901,
       0.30503972])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.45 : [0.19137776640654985, 0.2700681502925035, 0.2698441355238611]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.45 : [0.5392216393677619, 0.5613329319412529, 0.5601628587950533]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.45 : [0.11149202563720376, 0.16757727714991394, 0.16822990920687325]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6750902527075813, 0.6953416149068323, 0.6814589665653495]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6408930803317805, 0.6562038404726735, 0.6553516645835701]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.45 : [array([0.38361612, 0.38361612, 0.38361612, ..., 0.38361612, 0.38361612,
       0.38361612]), array([0.39392702, 1.        , 0.39392702, ..., 0.39392702, 0.39392702,
       0.39392702]), array([0.       , 0.       , 0.3969344, ..., 1.       , 0.3969344,
       1.       ])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.45 : [0.255717021516278, 0.2894314344239606, 0.2979050126137984]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.45 : [0.5371720954478308, 0.5500263868418644, 0.5518229800650943]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.45 : [0.16917573408853778, 0.1956440386198638, 0.2037968034816538]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.45 : [0.5235239852398524, 0.5559336452573373, 0.5534950071326676]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6246449267128735, 0.6354107487785479, 0.6363481422565618]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.45 : [array([0.37202761, 0.37202761, 0.37202761, ..., 0.37202761, 0.37202761,
       0.40005868]), array([0.3808837 , 0.37274264, 0.3808837 , ..., 0.3808837 , 0.3808837 ,
       0.3808837 ]), array([0.0852297 , 0.27730747, 0.48041575, ..., 0.3693666 , 0.38087877,
       0.20538718])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.45 : [0.10752392097473669, 0.17801184990125082, 0.1884105311295486]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.45 : [0.52157492774093, 0.5396761855120957, 0.5418046791817465]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.45 : [0.05820539573706961, 0.10119003068632587, 0.1082013956629399]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.45 : [0.7042380522993688, 0.7392017495899399, 0.7282828282828283]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6317179865924327, 0.6453243949551187, 0.6471139643222361]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.45 : [array([0.37311947, 0.37311947, 0.37311947, ..., 0.37311947, 0.37311947,
       0.37311947], dtype=float32), array([0.38365665, 0.76604736, 0.38365665, ..., 0.38365665, 0.38365665,
       0.38365665], dtype=float32), array([0.11199798, 0.47093037, 0.38099918, ..., 0.35861742, 0.38099918,
       0.2598683 ], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.45 : [0.19574042845543688, 0.1993503598496911, 0.21215358511908503]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6204571676009326, 0.6549348155360812, 0.6479590172147653]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6043193212495179, 0.6688034188034188, 0.6527455529775715]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.45 : [0.11678342524966463, 0.1171319512012574, 0.1266601635776994]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6342177025338029, 0.6429098966026587, 0.6438756959436428]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.45 : [array([0.38365994, 0.38365994, 0.38365994, ..., 0.38365994, 0.38365994,
       0.38365994]), array([0.39390033, 0.5133901 , 0.39390033, ..., 0.39390033, 0.39390033,
       0.39390033]), array([0.17416667, 0.52815734, 0.42776976, ..., 0.47232715, 0.39702942,
       0.26633318])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.45 : [0.23555609051516613, 0.2820110433013659, 0.29336410848240047]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.45 : [0.5444428361863062, 0.5583277064464263, 0.5619790680913517]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6119449656035022, 0.6311134235171696, 0.6350237322008494]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.45 : [0.1458488597406469, 0.18157323553626226, 0.19074060178584828]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6391887285535734, 0.6491023747301443, 0.6521418020679468]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.285
Logistic F1-score 29.709288584259042
Logistic ROCAUC score: 57.06897026542577
Logistic Recall score: 18.756994702678504
Logistic Precision Score: 71.40017040613462
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[20794  1007]
 [10889  2514]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.66      0.95      0.78     21801
           1       0.71      0.19      0.30     13403

    accuracy                           0.66     35204
   macro avg       0.69      0.57      0.54     35204
weighted avg       0.68      0.66      0.59     35204


Logistic Accuracy Score 66.20838541074878
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.5983445644378662 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.285
DCT F1-score 31.105538595726124
DCT ROCAUC score: 55.85436843832656
DCT Recall score: 21.286279191225844
DCT Precision Score: 57.74134790528234
DCT Confusion Matrix [[19713  2088]
 [10550  2853]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.90      0.76     21801
           1       0.58      0.21      0.31     13403

    accuracy                           0.64     35204
   macro avg       0.61      0.56      0.53     35204
weighted avg       0.62      0.64      0.59     35204


DCT Accuracy Score 64.1006703783661
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  4.615678787231445 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.285
Naive F1-score 20.47891121525326
Naive ROCAUC score: 54.62223967426725
Naive Recall score: 11.900320823696187
Naive Precision Score: 73.3670653173873
Naive Confusion Matrix [[21222   579]
 [11808  1595]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.97      0.77     21801
           1       0.73      0.12      0.20     13403

    accuracy                           0.65     35204
   macro avg       0.69      0.55      0.49     35204
weighted avg       0.68      0.65      0.56     35204


Naive Accuracy Score 64.81365753891603
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.04188966751098633 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.285
XGB F1-Score 19.20743513618175
XGB ROCAUC Score: 67.58963838490355
XGB Recall score: 71.16212338593975
XGB Precision Score: 11.101992091322838
XGB Confusion Matrix [[21198 11915]
 [  603  1488]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.97      0.64      0.77     33113
           1       0.11      0.71      0.19      2091

    accuracy                           0.64     35204
   macro avg       0.54      0.68      0.48     35204
weighted avg       0.92      0.64      0.74     35204


XGB Accuracy Score 64.81365753891603
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  1.1449344158172607 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.285
RFC F1 score 31.0781517398745
RFC ROCAUC Score: 56.944161745932966
RFC Recall score: 66.00436152168645
RFC Precision Score: 20.32380810266358
RFC Confusion Matrix [[20398  1403]
 [10679  2724]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.66      0.94      0.77     21801
           1       0.66      0.20      0.31     13403

    accuracy                           0.66     35204
   macro avg       0.66      0.57      0.54     35204
weighted avg       0.66      0.66      0.60     35204


RFC Accuracy Score 65.6800363595046
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  1657.8646833896637 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.45 : [array([0.37268984, 0.37268984, 0.37268984, ..., 0.37268984, 0.37268984,
       0.37268984]), array([0.38218112, 0.59086418, 0.38218112, ..., 0.38218112, 0.38218112,
       0.38218112]), array([0.17122382, 0.48759222, 0.41501093, ..., 0.43010795, 0.38137901,
       0.30503972]), array([0.37748303, 0.08103309, 0.48736903, ..., 0.37748303, 0.34348699,
       0.15647495])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.45 : [0.19137776640654985, 0.2700681502925035, 0.2698441355238611, 0.2970928858425904]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.45 : [0.5392216393677619, 0.5613329319412529, 0.5601628587950533, 0.5706897026542577]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.45 : [0.11149202563720376, 0.16757727714991394, 0.16822990920687325, 0.18756994702678506]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6750902527075813, 0.6953416149068323, 0.6814589665653495, 0.7140017040613462]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6408930803317805, 0.6562038404726735, 0.6553516645835701, 0.6620838541074878]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.45 : [array([0.38361612, 0.38361612, 0.38361612, ..., 0.38361612, 0.38361612,
       0.38361612]), array([0.39392702, 1.        , 0.39392702, ..., 0.39392702, 0.39392702,
       0.39392702]), array([0.       , 0.       , 0.3969344, ..., 1.       , 0.3969344,
       1.       ]), array([0.38988399, 0.        , 0.        , ..., 0.38988399, 0.38988399,
       0.        ])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.45 : [0.255717021516278, 0.2894314344239606, 0.2979050126137984, 0.31105538595726123]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.45 : [0.5371720954478308, 0.5500263868418644, 0.5518229800650943, 0.5585436843832656]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.45 : [0.16917573408853778, 0.1956440386198638, 0.2037968034816538, 0.21286279191225846]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.45 : [0.5235239852398524, 0.5559336452573373, 0.5534950071326676, 0.5774134790528234]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6246449267128735, 0.6354107487785479, 0.6363481422565618, 0.641006703783661]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.45 : [array([0.37202761, 0.37202761, 0.37202761, ..., 0.37202761, 0.37202761,
       0.40005868]), array([0.3808837 , 0.37274264, 0.3808837 , ..., 0.3808837 , 0.3808837 ,
       0.3808837 ]), array([0.0852297 , 0.27730747, 0.48041575, ..., 0.3693666 , 0.38087877,
       0.20538718]), array([0.3782911 , 0.06877617, 0.34034451, ..., 0.3782911 , 0.38315911,
       0.08882848])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.45 : [0.10752392097473669, 0.17801184990125082, 0.1884105311295486, 0.2047891121525326]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.45 : [0.52157492774093, 0.5396761855120957, 0.5418046791817465, 0.5462223967426725]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.45 : [0.05820539573706961, 0.10119003068632587, 0.1082013956629399, 0.11900320823696188]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.45 : [0.7042380522993688, 0.7392017495899399, 0.7282828282828283, 0.733670653173873]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6317179865924327, 0.6453243949551187, 0.6471139643222361, 0.6481365753891604]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.45 : [array([0.37311947, 0.37311947, 0.37311947, ..., 0.37311947, 0.37311947,
       0.37311947], dtype=float32), array([0.38365665, 0.76604736, 0.38365665, ..., 0.38365665, 0.38365665,
       0.38365665], dtype=float32), array([0.11199798, 0.47093037, 0.38099918, ..., 0.35861742, 0.38099918,
       0.2598683 ], dtype=float32), array([0.37862718, 0.11280015, 0.37862718, ..., 0.37862718, 0.37862718,
       0.0466582 ], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.45 : [0.19574042845543688, 0.1993503598496911, 0.21215358511908503, 0.1920743513618175]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6204571676009326, 0.6549348155360812, 0.6479590172147653, 0.6758963838490355]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6043193212495179, 0.6688034188034188, 0.6527455529775715, 0.7116212338593975]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.45 : [0.11678342524966463, 0.1171319512012574, 0.1266601635776994, 0.11101992091322838]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6342177025338029, 0.6429098966026587, 0.6438756959436428, 0.644415407340075]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.45 : [array([0.38365994, 0.38365994, 0.38365994, ..., 0.38365994, 0.38365994,
       0.38365994]), array([0.39390033, 0.5133901 , 0.39390033, ..., 0.39390033, 0.39390033,
       0.39390033]), array([0.17416667, 0.52815734, 0.42776976, ..., 0.47232715, 0.39702942,
       0.26633318]), array([0.38980604, 0.0818679 , 0.53486182, ..., 0.38980604, 0.40138523,
       0.17158333])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.45 : [0.23555609051516613, 0.2820110433013659, 0.29336410848240047, 0.310781517398745]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.45 : [0.5444428361863062, 0.5583277064464263, 0.5619790680913517, 0.5694416174593296]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6119449656035022, 0.6311134235171696, 0.6350237322008494, 0.6600436152168645]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.45 : [0.1458488597406469, 0.18157323553626226, 0.19074060178584828, 0.20323808102663582]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6391887285535734, 0.6491023747301443, 0.6521418020679468, 0.656800363595046]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.319
Logistic F1-score 30.353817504655495
Logistic ROCAUC score: 57.20111984682244
Logistic Recall score: 19.298505253810863
Logistic Precision Score: 71.06267029972751
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[20628  1062]
 [10906  2608]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.95      0.78     21690
           1       0.71      0.19      0.30     13514

    accuracy                           0.66     35204
   macro avg       0.68      0.57      0.54     35204
weighted avg       0.68      0.66      0.59     35204


Logistic Accuracy Score 66.00386319736393
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.20043134689331055 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.319
DCT F1-score 31.031866464339902
DCT ROCAUC score: 55.80940838089258
DCT Recall score: 21.185437324256327
DCT Precision Score: 57.978938841636285
DCT Confusion Matrix [[19615  2075]
 [10651  2863]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.90      0.76     21690
           1       0.58      0.21      0.31     13514

    accuracy                           0.64     35204
   macro avg       0.61      0.56      0.53     35204
weighted avg       0.62      0.64      0.58     35204


DCT Accuracy Score 63.85069878422907
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  5.507615327835083 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.319
Naive F1-score 22.310206133735544
Naive ROCAUC score: 55.131117889253446
Naive Recall score: 13.134527157022347
Naive Precision Score: 74.02001668056714
Naive Confusion Matrix [[21067   623]
 [11739  1775]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.97      0.77     21690
           1       0.74      0.13      0.22     13514

    accuracy                           0.65     35204
   macro avg       0.69      0.55      0.50     35204
weighted avg       0.68      0.65      0.56     35204


Naive Accuracy Score 64.88467219634131
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.043886661529541016 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.319
XGB F1-Score 21.808610641097946
XGB ROCAUC Score: 67.64241556797506
XGB Recall score: 71.22390503479329
XGB Precision Score: 12.875536480686694
XGB Confusion Matrix [[20987 11774]
 [  703  1740]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.97      0.64      0.77     32761
           1       0.13      0.71      0.22      2443

    accuracy                           0.65     35204
   macro avg       0.55      0.68      0.49     35204
weighted avg       0.91      0.65      0.73     35204


XGB Accuracy Score 64.88467219634131
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  1.2476599216461182 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.319
RFC F1 score 30.871265801258435
RFC ROCAUC Score: 56.838222786635285
RFC Recall score: 65.98013084565059
RFC Precision Score: 20.149474618913718
RFC Confusion Matrix [[20286  1404]
 [10791  2723]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.94      0.77     21690
           1       0.66      0.20      0.31     13514

    accuracy                           0.65     35204
   macro avg       0.66      0.57      0.54     35204
weighted avg       0.66      0.65      0.59     35204


RFC Accuracy Score 65.35905010794228
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  1904.4942054748535 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.45 : [array([0.37268984, 0.37268984, 0.37268984, ..., 0.37268984, 0.37268984,
       0.37268984]), array([0.38218112, 0.59086418, 0.38218112, ..., 0.38218112, 0.38218112,
       0.38218112]), array([0.17122382, 0.48759222, 0.41501093, ..., 0.43010795, 0.38137901,
       0.30503972]), array([0.37748303, 0.08103309, 0.48736903, ..., 0.37748303, 0.34348699,
       0.15647495]), array([0.56104316, 0.51154409, 0.3237279 , ..., 0.38052637, 0.38052637,
       0.47740855])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.45 : [0.19137776640654985, 0.2700681502925035, 0.2698441355238611, 0.2970928858425904, 0.30353817504655495]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.45 : [0.5392216393677619, 0.5613329319412529, 0.5601628587950533, 0.5706897026542577, 0.5720111984682245]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.45 : [0.11149202563720376, 0.16757727714991394, 0.16822990920687325, 0.18756994702678506, 0.19298505253810863]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6750902527075813, 0.6953416149068323, 0.6814589665653495, 0.7140017040613462, 0.7106267029972752]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6408930803317805, 0.6562038404726735, 0.6553516645835701, 0.6620838541074878, 0.6600386319736393]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.45 : [array([0.38361612, 0.38361612, 0.38361612, ..., 0.38361612, 0.38361612,
       0.38361612]), array([0.39392702, 1.        , 0.39392702, ..., 0.39392702, 0.39392702,
       0.39392702]), array([0.       , 0.       , 0.3969344, ..., 1.       , 0.3969344,
       1.       ]), array([0.38988399, 0.        , 0.        , ..., 0.38988399, 0.38988399,
       0.        ]), array([1.        , 1.        , 0.        , ..., 0.39387841, 0.39387841,
       1.        ])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.45 : [0.255717021516278, 0.2894314344239606, 0.2979050126137984, 0.31105538595726123, 0.310318664643399]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.45 : [0.5371720954478308, 0.5500263868418644, 0.5518229800650943, 0.5585436843832656, 0.5580940838089258]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.45 : [0.16917573408853778, 0.1956440386198638, 0.2037968034816538, 0.21286279191225846, 0.21185437324256326]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.45 : [0.5235239852398524, 0.5559336452573373, 0.5534950071326676, 0.5774134790528234, 0.5797893884163628]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6246449267128735, 0.6354107487785479, 0.6363481422565618, 0.641006703783661, 0.6385069878422907]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.45 : [array([0.37202761, 0.37202761, 0.37202761, ..., 0.37202761, 0.37202761,
       0.40005868]), array([0.3808837 , 0.37274264, 0.3808837 , ..., 0.3808837 , 0.3808837 ,
       0.3808837 ]), array([0.0852297 , 0.27730747, 0.48041575, ..., 0.3693666 , 0.38087877,
       0.20538718]), array([0.3782911 , 0.06877617, 0.34034451, ..., 0.3782911 , 0.38315911,
       0.08882848]), array([0.22171467, 0.63038821, 0.294287  , ..., 0.37880184, 0.37880184,
       0.12645819])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.45 : [0.10752392097473669, 0.17801184990125082, 0.1884105311295486, 0.2047891121525326, 0.22310206133735544]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.45 : [0.52157492774093, 0.5396761855120957, 0.5418046791817465, 0.5462223967426725, 0.5513111788925344]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.45 : [0.05820539573706961, 0.10119003068632587, 0.1082013956629399, 0.11900320823696188, 0.13134527157022347]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.45 : [0.7042380522993688, 0.7392017495899399, 0.7282828282828283, 0.733670653173873, 0.7402001668056714]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6317179865924327, 0.6453243949551187, 0.6471139643222361, 0.6481365753891604, 0.6488467219634132]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.45 : [array([0.37311947, 0.37311947, 0.37311947, ..., 0.37311947, 0.37311947,
       0.37311947], dtype=float32), array([0.38365665, 0.76604736, 0.38365665, ..., 0.38365665, 0.38365665,
       0.38365665], dtype=float32), array([0.11199798, 0.47093037, 0.38099918, ..., 0.35861742, 0.38099918,
       0.2598683 ], dtype=float32), array([0.37862718, 0.11280015, 0.37862718, ..., 0.37862718, 0.37862718,
       0.0466582 ], dtype=float32), array([0.65143275, 0.3804508 , 0.3804508 , ..., 0.3804508 , 0.3804508 ,
       0.40712318], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.45 : [0.19574042845543688, 0.1993503598496911, 0.21215358511908503, 0.1920743513618175, 0.21808610641097947]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6204571676009326, 0.6549348155360812, 0.6479590172147653, 0.6758963838490355, 0.6764241556797507]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6043193212495179, 0.6688034188034188, 0.6527455529775715, 0.7116212338593975, 0.7122390503479329]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.45 : [0.11678342524966463, 0.1171319512012574, 0.1266601635776994, 0.11101992091322838, 0.12875536480686695]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6342177025338029, 0.6429098966026587, 0.6438756959436428, 0.644415407340075, 0.6455800477218497]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.45 : [array([0.38365994, 0.38365994, 0.38365994, ..., 0.38365994, 0.38365994,
       0.38365994]), array([0.39390033, 0.5133901 , 0.39390033, ..., 0.39390033, 0.39390033,
       0.39390033]), array([0.17416667, 0.52815734, 0.42776976, ..., 0.47232715, 0.39702942,
       0.26633318]), array([0.38980604, 0.0818679 , 0.53486182, ..., 0.38980604, 0.40138523,
       0.17158333]), array([0.39807778, 0.78614149, 0.12231185, ..., 0.39399216, 0.39399216,
       0.4844746 ])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.45 : [0.23555609051516613, 0.2820110433013659, 0.29336410848240047, 0.310781517398745, 0.30871265801258435]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.45 : [0.5444428361863062, 0.5583277064464263, 0.5619790680913517, 0.5694416174593296, 0.5683822278663528]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6119449656035022, 0.6311134235171696, 0.6350237322008494, 0.6600436152168645, 0.659801308456506]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.45 : [0.1458488597406469, 0.18157323553626226, 0.19074060178584828, 0.20323808102663582, 0.20149474618913718]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.45 : [0.6391887285535734, 0.6491023747301443, 0.6521418020679468, 0.656800363595046, 0.6535905010794228]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.033
Logistic F1-score 15.384615384615385
Logistic ROCAUC score: 52.5520976777018
Logistic Recall score: 8.838229915884433
Logistic Precision Score: 59.32896890343699
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[25626   994]
 [14956  1450]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.96      0.76     26620
           1       0.59      0.09      0.15     16406

    accuracy                           0.63     43026
   macro avg       0.61      0.53      0.46     43026
weighted avg       0.62      0.63      0.53     43026


Logistic Accuracy Score 62.92939153070236
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.17348837852478027 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.033
DCT F1-score 22.548563992936145
DCT ROCAUC score: 52.348557586406464
DCT Recall score: 14.787272948921126
DCT Precision Score: 47.45696400625978
DCT Confusion Matrix [[23934  2686]
 [13980  2426]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.90      0.74     26620
           1       0.47      0.15      0.23     16406

    accuracy                           0.61     43026
   macro avg       0.55      0.52      0.48     43026
weighted avg       0.57      0.61      0.54     43026


DCT Accuracy Score 61.26528145772324
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  0.5221209526062012 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.033
Naive F1-score 11.15709319649065
Naive ROCAUC score: 51.75511918501533
Naive Recall score: 6.162379617213214
Naive Precision Score: 58.88177052999417
Naive Confusion Matrix [[25914   706]
 [15395  1011]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.97      0.76     26620
           1       0.59      0.06      0.11     16406

    accuracy                           0.63     43026
   macro avg       0.61      0.52      0.44     43026
weighted avg       0.61      0.63      0.51     43026


Naive Accuracy Score 62.57844094268582
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.04989981651306152 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.033
XGB F1-Score 18.216786665351613
XGB ROCAUC Score: 55.25875297141991
XGB Recall score: 47.70144628099173
XGB Precision Score: 11.258076313543826
XGB Confusion Matrix [[24595 14559]
 [ 2025  1847]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.92      0.63      0.75     39154
           1       0.11      0.48      0.18      3872

    accuracy                           0.61     43026
   macro avg       0.52      0.55      0.47     43026
weighted avg       0.85      0.61      0.70     43026


XGB Accuracy Score 62.57844094268582
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  0.5375635623931885 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.033
RFC F1 score 20.513074484944536
RFC ROCAUC Score: 53.090453017271265
RFC Recall score: 54.70153195985209
RFC Precision Score: 12.62343045227356
RFC Confusion Matrix [[24905  1715]
 [14335  2071]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.94      0.76     26620
           1       0.55      0.13      0.21     16406

    accuracy                           0.63     43026
   macro avg       0.59      0.53      0.48     43026
weighted avg       0.60      0.63      0.55     43026


RFC Accuracy Score 62.69697392274439
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  179.3370292186737 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.55 : [array([0.41361099, 0.3913379 , 0.3913379 , ..., 0.28226507, 0.3913379 ,
       0.3913379 ])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.55 : [0.15384615384615385]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.55 : [0.525520976777018]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.55 : [0.08838229915884432]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5932896890343698]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.55 : [0.6292939153070236]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.55 : [array([1.        , 0.41205615, 0.41205615, ..., 0.        , 0.41205615,
       0.41205615])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.55 : [0.22548563992936146]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5234855758640646]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.55 : [0.14787272948921126]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.55 : [0.47456964006259783]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.55 : [0.6126528145772324]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.55 : [array([0.39538839, 0.40134755, 0.39519566, ..., 0.19674288, 0.39519566,
       0.39519566])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.55 : [0.11157093196490649]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5175511918501533]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.55 : [0.06162379617213214]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5888177052999417]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.55 : [0.6257844094268582]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.55 : [array([0.39351183, 0.39351183, 0.39351183, ..., 0.34631637, 0.39351183,
       0.39351183], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.55 : [0.18216786665351611]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5525875297141991]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.55 : [0.47701446280991733]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.55 : [0.11258076313543826]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.55 : [0.6145586389624877]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.55 : [array([0.39681211, 0.41225537, 0.41225537, ..., 0.21739147, 0.41225537,
       0.41225537])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.55 : [0.20513074484944535]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5309045301727127]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5470153195985209]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.55 : [0.1262343045227356]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.55 : [0.6269697392274439]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.125
Logistic F1-score 23.89206124614685
Logistic ROCAUC score: 55.289339615548506
Logistic Recall score: 14.410240780249925
Logistic Precision Score: 69.8581560283688
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[25601  1020]
 [14041  2364]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.96      0.77     26621
           1       0.70      0.14      0.24     16405

    accuracy                           0.65     43026
   macro avg       0.67      0.55      0.51     43026
weighted avg       0.67      0.65      0.57     43026


Logistic Accuracy Score 64.9955840654488
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.2114706039428711 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.125
DCT F1-score 27.08219923788786
DCT ROCAUC score: 54.113049578811825
DCT Recall score: 18.1956720512039
DCT Precision Score: 52.93491753857067
DCT Confusion Matrix [[23967  2654]
 [13420  2985]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.90      0.75     26621
           1       0.53      0.18      0.27     16405

    accuracy                           0.63     43026
   macro avg       0.59      0.54      0.51     43026
weighted avg       0.60      0.63      0.57     43026


DCT Accuracy Score 62.64119369683448
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  1.8929686546325684 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.125
Naive F1-score 15.972146665215972
Naive ROCAUC score: 53.51823348596938
Naive Recall score: 8.948491313623895
Naive Precision Score: 74.2539200809307
Naive Confusion Matrix [[26112   509]
 [14937  1468]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.98      0.77     26621
           1       0.74      0.09      0.16     16405

    accuracy                           0.64     43026
   macro avg       0.69      0.54      0.47     43026
weighted avg       0.68      0.64      0.54     43026


Naive Accuracy Score 64.10077627481058
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.05086469650268555 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.125
XGB F1-Score 20.516221179351152
XGB ROCAUC Score: 63.36104182003233
XGB Recall score: 62.863394810878404
XGB Precision Score: 12.258457787259982
XGB Confusion Matrix [[25433 14394]
 [ 1188  2011]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.96      0.64      0.77     39827
           1       0.12      0.63      0.21      3199

    accuracy                           0.64     43026
   macro avg       0.54      0.63      0.49     43026
weighted avg       0.89      0.64      0.72     43026


XGB Accuracy Score 64.10077627481058
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  0.8178141117095947 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.125
RFC F1 score 26.84570218500337
RFC ROCAUC Score: 55.52536232775922
RFC Recall score: 63.77772696089641
RFC Precision Score: 17.000914355379457
RFC Confusion Matrix [[25037  1584]
 [13616  2789]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.94      0.77     26621
           1       0.64      0.17      0.27     16405

    accuracy                           0.65     43026
   macro avg       0.64      0.56      0.52     43026
weighted avg       0.64      0.65      0.58     43026


RFC Accuracy Score 64.67252359038721
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  730.9548091888428 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.55 : [array([0.41361099, 0.3913379 , 0.3913379 , ..., 0.28226507, 0.3913379 ,
       0.3913379 ]), array([0.37974897, 0.37974897, 0.37974897, ..., 0.37974897, 0.37974897,
       0.36412095])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.55 : [0.15384615384615385, 0.23892061246146848]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.55 : [0.525520976777018, 0.552893396155485]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.55 : [0.08838229915884432, 0.14410240780249925]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5932896890343698, 0.6985815602836879]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.55 : [0.6292939153070236, 0.649955840654488]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.55 : [array([1.        , 0.41205615, 0.41205615, ..., 0.        , 0.41205615,
       0.41205615]), array([0.38938053, 0.38938053, 0.38938053, ..., 0.38938053, 0.38938053,
       0.        ])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.55 : [0.22548563992936146, 0.2708219923788786]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5234855758640646, 0.5411304957881182]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.55 : [0.14787272948921126, 0.181956720512039]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.55 : [0.47456964006259783, 0.5293491753857067]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.55 : [0.6126528145772324, 0.6264119369683447]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.55 : [array([0.39538839, 0.40134755, 0.39519566, ..., 0.19674288, 0.39519566,
       0.39519566]), array([0.38259358, 0.4034177 , 0.38259358, ..., 0.38259358, 0.38259358,
       0.19649459])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.55 : [0.11157093196490649, 0.15972146665215972]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5175511918501533, 0.5351823348596938]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.55 : [0.06162379617213214, 0.08948491313623895]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5888177052999417, 0.742539200809307]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.55 : [0.6257844094268582, 0.6410077627481058]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.55 : [array([0.39351183, 0.39351183, 0.39351183, ..., 0.34631637, 0.39351183,
       0.39351183], dtype=float32), array([0.38116792, 0.38116792, 0.38116792, ..., 0.38116792, 0.38116792,
       0.53310776], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.55 : [0.18216786665351611, 0.20516221179351152]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5525875297141991, 0.6336104182003233]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.55 : [0.47701446280991733, 0.628633948108784]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.55 : [0.11258076313543826, 0.12258457787259981]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.55 : [0.6145586389624877, 0.6378468832798773]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.55 : [array([0.39681211, 0.41225537, 0.41225537, ..., 0.21739147, 0.41225537,
       0.41225537]), array([0.38948246, 0.38948246, 0.38948246, ..., 0.38948246, 0.38948246,
       0.50486627])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.55 : [0.20513074484944535, 0.2684570218500337]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5309045301727127, 0.5552536232775922]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5470153195985209, 0.6377772696089641]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.55 : [0.1262343045227356, 0.17000914355379457]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.55 : [0.6269697392274439, 0.6467252359038721]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.189
Logistic F1-score 26.507450902990225
Logistic ROCAUC score: 56.00038985470874
Logistic Recall score: 16.357103708665733
Logistic Precision Score: 69.85695708712613
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[25446  1159]
 [13735  2686]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.96      0.77     26605
           1       0.70      0.16      0.27     16421

    accuracy                           0.65     43026
   macro avg       0.67      0.56      0.52     43026
weighted avg       0.67      0.65      0.58     43026


Logistic Accuracy Score 65.38372147073862
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.3420848846435547 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.189
DCT F1-score 28.30833751196608
DCT ROCAUC score: 54.92325404940921
DCT Recall score: 18.908714451007853
DCT Precision Score: 56.29079042784626
DCT Confusion Matrix [[24194  2411]
 [13316  3105]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.91      0.75     26605
           1       0.56      0.19      0.28     16421

    accuracy                           0.63     43026
   macro avg       0.60      0.55      0.52     43026
weighted avg       0.61      0.63      0.57     43026


DCT Accuracy Score 63.44768279644866
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  3.071812629699707 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.189
Naive F1-score 17.682633128177685
Naive ROCAUC score: 53.87998458297672
Naive Recall score: 10.060288654771329
Naive Precision Score: 72.96819787985865
Naive Confusion Matrix [[25993   612]
 [14769  1652]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.98      0.77     26605
           1       0.73      0.10      0.18     16421

    accuracy                           0.64     43026
   macro avg       0.68      0.54      0.47     43026
weighted avg       0.67      0.64      0.54     43026


Naive Accuracy Score 64.25184771998327
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.052860260009765625 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.189
XGB F1-Score 19.278866194247605
XGB ROCAUC Score: 65.28307786687007
XGB Recall score: 66.76290147961025
XGB Precision Score: 11.266061750197917
XGB Confusion Matrix [[25684 14571]
 [  921  1850]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.97      0.64      0.77     40255
           1       0.11      0.67      0.19      2771

    accuracy                           0.64     43026
   macro avg       0.54      0.65      0.48     43026
weighted avg       0.91      0.64      0.73     43026


XGB Accuracy Score 64.25184771998327
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  0.963423490524292 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.189
RFC F1 score 28.072859396663002
RFC ROCAUC Score: 56.007992502209504
RFC Recall score: 65.30249110320284
RFC Precision Score: 17.879544485719506
RFC Confusion Matrix [[25045  1560]
 [13485  2936]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.94      0.77     26605
           1       0.65      0.18      0.28     16421

    accuracy                           0.65     43026
   macro avg       0.65      0.56      0.52     43026
weighted avg       0.65      0.65      0.58     43026


RFC Accuracy Score 65.03277088272208
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  1131.4280335903168 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.55 : [array([0.41361099, 0.3913379 , 0.3913379 , ..., 0.28226507, 0.3913379 ,
       0.3913379 ]), array([0.37974897, 0.37974897, 0.37974897, ..., 0.37974897, 0.37974897,
       0.36412095]), array([0.37859643, 0.37859643, 0.37859643, ..., 0.60449736, 0.34094898,
       0.37859643])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.55 : [0.15384615384615385, 0.23892061246146848, 0.26507450902990226]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.55 : [0.525520976777018, 0.552893396155485, 0.5600038985470874]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.55 : [0.08838229915884432, 0.14410240780249925, 0.16357103708665732]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5932896890343698, 0.6985815602836879, 0.6985695708712614]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.55 : [0.6292939153070236, 0.649955840654488, 0.6538372147073862]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.55 : [array([1.        , 0.41205615, 0.41205615, ..., 0.        , 0.41205615,
       0.41205615]), array([0.38938053, 0.38938053, 0.38938053, ..., 0.38938053, 0.38938053,
       0.        ]), array([0.3952307 , 0.3952307 , 0.3952307 , ..., 0.65217391, 1.        ,
       0.3952307 ])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.55 : [0.22548563992936146, 0.2708219923788786, 0.2830833751196608]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5234855758640646, 0.5411304957881182, 0.5492325404940921]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.55 : [0.14787272948921126, 0.181956720512039, 0.18908714451007855]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.55 : [0.47456964006259783, 0.5293491753857067, 0.5629079042784626]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.55 : [0.6126528145772324, 0.6264119369683447, 0.6344768279644866]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.55 : [array([0.39538839, 0.40134755, 0.39519566, ..., 0.19674288, 0.39519566,
       0.39519566]), array([0.38259358, 0.4034177 , 0.38259358, ..., 0.38259358, 0.38259358,
       0.19649459]), array([0.37754481, 0.37754481, 0.37754481, ..., 0.5369887 , 0.13145201,
       0.41002097])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.55 : [0.11157093196490649, 0.15972146665215972, 0.17682633128177683]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5175511918501533, 0.5351823348596938, 0.5387998458297671]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.55 : [0.06162379617213214, 0.08948491313623895, 0.1006028865477133]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5888177052999417, 0.742539200809307, 0.7296819787985865]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.55 : [0.6257844094268582, 0.6410077627481058, 0.6425184771998327]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.55 : [array([0.39351183, 0.39351183, 0.39351183, ..., 0.34631637, 0.39351183,
       0.39351183], dtype=float32), array([0.38116792, 0.38116792, 0.38116792, ..., 0.38116792, 0.38116792,
       0.53310776], dtype=float32), array([0.37877655, 0.37877655, 0.37877655, ..., 0.50555456, 0.12095393,
       0.37877655], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.55 : [0.18216786665351611, 0.20516221179351152, 0.19278866194247604]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5525875297141991, 0.6336104182003233, 0.6528307786687008]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.55 : [0.47701446280991733, 0.628633948108784, 0.6676290147961025]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.55 : [0.11258076313543826, 0.12258457787259981, 0.11266061750197917]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.55 : [0.6145586389624877, 0.6378468832798773, 0.6399386417514991]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.55 : [array([0.39681211, 0.41225537, 0.41225537, ..., 0.21739147, 0.41225537,
       0.41225537]), array([0.38948246, 0.38948246, 0.38948246, ..., 0.38948246, 0.38948246,
       0.50486627]), array([0.39488318, 0.39488318, 0.39488318, ..., 0.65114143, 0.37223797,
       0.39488318])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.55 : [0.20513074484944535, 0.2684570218500337, 0.28072859396663]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5309045301727127, 0.5552536232775922, 0.560079925022095]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5470153195985209, 0.6377772696089641, 0.6530249110320284]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.55 : [0.1262343045227356, 0.17000914355379457, 0.17879544485719506]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.55 : [0.6269697392274439, 0.6467252359038721, 0.6503277088272208]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.225
Logistic F1-score 27.40831897612602
Logistic ROCAUC score: 56.35242407829861
Logistic Recall score: 16.98493075468245
Logistic Precision Score: 70.9480122324159
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[25495  1140]
 [13607  2784]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.96      0.78     26635
           1       0.71      0.17      0.27     16391

    accuracy                           0.66     43026
   macro avg       0.68      0.56      0.52     43026
weighted avg       0.67      0.66      0.58     43026


Logistic Accuracy Score 65.72537535443685
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.272266149520874 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.225
DCT F1-score 30.060192255862
DCT ROCAUC score: 55.46681706184321
DCT Recall score: 20.41364163260326
DCT Precision Score: 56.991994549480495
DCT Confusion Matrix [[24110  2525]
 [13045  3346]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.91      0.76     26635
           1       0.57      0.20      0.30     16391

    accuracy                           0.64     43026
   macro avg       0.61      0.55      0.53     43026
weighted avg       0.62      0.64      0.58     43026


DCT Accuracy Score 63.812578440942694
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  3.4801251888275146 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.225
Naive F1-score 19.27826272088567
Naive ROCAUC score: 54.42431681472032
Naive Recall score: 11.048746263193216
Naive Precision Score: 75.55277430120985
Naive Confusion Matrix [[26049   586]
 [14580  1811]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.98      0.77     26635
           1       0.76      0.11      0.19     16391

    accuracy                           0.65     43026
   macro avg       0.70      0.54      0.48     43026
weighted avg       0.68      0.65      0.55     43026


Naive Accuracy Score 64.75154557709291
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.05385756492614746 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.225
XGB F1-Score 19.46902654867257
XGB ROCAUC Score: 66.32876016260163
XGB Recall score: 68.69918699186992
XGB Precision Score: 11.341589896894638
XGB Confusion Matrix [[25788 14532]
 [  847  1859]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.97      0.64      0.77     40320
           1       0.11      0.69      0.19      2706

    accuracy                           0.64     43026
   macro avg       0.54      0.66      0.48     43026
weighted avg       0.91      0.64      0.73     43026


XGB Accuracy Score 64.75154557709291
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  1.0561718940734863 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.225
RFC F1 score 28.579618747312598
RFC ROCAUC Score: 56.21608141670552
RFC Recall score: 65.88105726872246
RFC Precision Score: 18.24781892501983
RFC Confusion Matrix [[25086  1549]
 [13400  2991]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.94      0.77     26635
           1       0.66      0.18      0.29     16391

    accuracy                           0.65     43026
   macro avg       0.66      0.56      0.53     43026
weighted avg       0.65      0.65      0.59     43026


RFC Accuracy Score 65.25589178636173
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  1355.29776263237 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.55 : [array([0.41361099, 0.3913379 , 0.3913379 , ..., 0.28226507, 0.3913379 ,
       0.3913379 ]), array([0.37974897, 0.37974897, 0.37974897, ..., 0.37974897, 0.37974897,
       0.36412095]), array([0.37859643, 0.37859643, 0.37859643, ..., 0.60449736, 0.34094898,
       0.37859643]), array([0.38082507, 0.38082507, 0.31777534, ..., 0.45902873, 0.38082507,
       0.72579796])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.55 : [0.15384615384615385, 0.23892061246146848, 0.26507450902990226, 0.27408318976126017]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.55 : [0.525520976777018, 0.552893396155485, 0.5600038985470874, 0.5635242407829861]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.55 : [0.08838229915884432, 0.14410240780249925, 0.16357103708665732, 0.16984930754682448]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5932896890343698, 0.6985815602836879, 0.6985695708712614, 0.709480122324159]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.55 : [0.6292939153070236, 0.649955840654488, 0.6538372147073862, 0.6572537535443685]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.55 : [array([1.        , 0.41205615, 0.41205615, ..., 0.        , 0.41205615,
       0.41205615]), array([0.38938053, 0.38938053, 0.38938053, ..., 0.38938053, 0.38938053,
       0.        ]), array([0.3952307 , 0.3952307 , 0.3952307 , ..., 0.65217391, 1.        ,
       0.3952307 ]), array([0.39675828, 0.39675828, 0.        , ..., 0.        , 0.39675828,
       1.        ])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.55 : [0.22548563992936146, 0.2708219923788786, 0.2830833751196608, 0.30060192255862]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5234855758640646, 0.5411304957881182, 0.5492325404940921, 0.5546681706184321]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.55 : [0.14787272948921126, 0.181956720512039, 0.18908714451007855, 0.20413641632603258]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.55 : [0.47456964006259783, 0.5293491753857067, 0.5629079042784626, 0.569919945494805]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.55 : [0.6126528145772324, 0.6264119369683447, 0.6344768279644866, 0.6381257844094269]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.55 : [array([0.39538839, 0.40134755, 0.39519566, ..., 0.19674288, 0.39519566,
       0.39519566]), array([0.38259358, 0.4034177 , 0.38259358, ..., 0.38259358, 0.38259358,
       0.19649459]), array([0.37754481, 0.37754481, 0.37754481, ..., 0.5369887 , 0.13145201,
       0.41002097]), array([0.37941026, 0.37941026, 0.33888352, ..., 0.3383195 , 0.37941026,
       0.63700566])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.55 : [0.11157093196490649, 0.15972146665215972, 0.17682633128177683, 0.1927826272088567]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5175511918501533, 0.5351823348596938, 0.5387998458297671, 0.5442431681472032]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.55 : [0.06162379617213214, 0.08948491313623895, 0.1006028865477133, 0.11048746263193215]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5888177052999417, 0.742539200809307, 0.7296819787985865, 0.7555277430120985]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.55 : [0.6257844094268582, 0.6410077627481058, 0.6425184771998327, 0.6475154557709292]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.55 : [array([0.39351183, 0.39351183, 0.39351183, ..., 0.34631637, 0.39351183,
       0.39351183], dtype=float32), array([0.38116792, 0.38116792, 0.38116792, ..., 0.38116792, 0.38116792,
       0.53310776], dtype=float32), array([0.37877655, 0.37877655, 0.37877655, ..., 0.50555456, 0.12095393,
       0.37877655], dtype=float32), array([0.3818973, 0.3818973, 0.3818973, ..., 0.3818973, 0.3818973,
       0.6441345], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.55 : [0.18216786665351611, 0.20516221179351152, 0.19278866194247604, 0.1946902654867257]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5525875297141991, 0.6336104182003233, 0.6528307786687008, 0.6632876016260163]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.55 : [0.47701446280991733, 0.628633948108784, 0.6676290147961025, 0.6869918699186992]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.55 : [0.11258076313543826, 0.12258457787259981, 0.11266061750197917, 0.11341589896894637]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.55 : [0.6145586389624877, 0.6378468832798773, 0.6399386417514991, 0.6425649607214242]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.55 : [array([0.39681211, 0.41225537, 0.41225537, ..., 0.21739147, 0.41225537,
       0.41225537]), array([0.38948246, 0.38948246, 0.38948246, ..., 0.38948246, 0.38948246,
       0.50486627]), array([0.39488318, 0.39488318, 0.39488318, ..., 0.65114143, 0.37223797,
       0.39488318]), array([0.39681806, 0.39681806, 0.20511223, ..., 0.3907388 , 0.39681806,
       0.98596918])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.55 : [0.20513074484944535, 0.2684570218500337, 0.28072859396663, 0.28579618747312596]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5309045301727127, 0.5552536232775922, 0.560079925022095, 0.5621608141670552]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5470153195985209, 0.6377772696089641, 0.6530249110320284, 0.6588105726872246]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.55 : [0.1262343045227356, 0.17000914355379457, 0.17879544485719506, 0.1824781892501983]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.55 : [0.6269697392274439, 0.6467252359038721, 0.6503277088272208, 0.6525589178636173]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.286
Logistic F1-score 29.70863431424831
Logistic ROCAUC score: 57.11105832805503
Logistic Recall score: 18.72631707615206
Logistic Precision Score: 71.84056271981243
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[25463  1201]
 [13298  3064]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.66      0.95      0.78     26664
           1       0.72      0.19      0.30     16362

    accuracy                           0.66     43026
   macro avg       0.69      0.57      0.54     43026
weighted avg       0.68      0.66      0.60     43026


Logistic Accuracy Score 66.30177102217264
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.5654470920562744 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.286
DCT F1-score 30.827945402298845
DCT ROCAUC score: 55.84593181540376
DCT Recall score: 20.981542598704316
DCT Precision Score: 58.08798646362098
DCT Confusion Matrix [[24187  2477]
 [12929  3433]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.91      0.76     26664
           1       0.58      0.21      0.31     16362

    accuracy                           0.64     43026
   macro avg       0.62      0.56      0.53     43026
weighted avg       0.62      0.64      0.59     43026


DCT Accuracy Score 64.19374331799376
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  4.884957551956177 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.286
Naive F1-score 21.186974789915965
Naive ROCAUC score: 54.92417297285284
Naive Recall score: 12.327343845495662
Naive Precision Score: 75.31740104555638
Naive Confusion Matrix [[26003   661]
 [14345  2017]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.98      0.78     26664
           1       0.75      0.12      0.21     16362

    accuracy                           0.65     43026
   macro avg       0.70      0.55      0.49     43026
weighted avg       0.69      0.65      0.56     43026


Naive Accuracy Score 65.12341374982569
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.05285787582397461 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.286
XGB F1-Score 20.510406861206988
XGB ROCAUC Score: 67.64302982989209
XGB Recall score: 71.05072463768116
XGB Precision Score: 11.985087397628652
XGB Confusion Matrix [[25865 14401]
 [  799  1961]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.97      0.64      0.77     40266
           1       0.12      0.71      0.21      2760

    accuracy                           0.65     43026
   macro avg       0.54      0.68      0.49     43026
weighted avg       0.92      0.65      0.74     43026


XGB Accuracy Score 65.12341374982569
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  1.2267189025878906 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.286
RFC F1 score 30.698944988696308
RFC ROCAUC Score: 56.93812436799236
RFC Recall score: 66.91991786447639
RFC Precision Score: 19.918102921403253
RFC Confusion Matrix [[25053  1611]
 [13103  3259]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.66      0.94      0.77     26664
           1       0.67      0.20      0.31     16362

    accuracy                           0.66     43026
   macro avg       0.66      0.57      0.54     43026
weighted avg       0.66      0.66      0.60     43026


RFC Accuracy Score 65.80207316506298
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  1749.8258719444275 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.55 : [array([0.41361099, 0.3913379 , 0.3913379 , ..., 0.28226507, 0.3913379 ,
       0.3913379 ]), array([0.37974897, 0.37974897, 0.37974897, ..., 0.37974897, 0.37974897,
       0.36412095]), array([0.37859643, 0.37859643, 0.37859643, ..., 0.60449736, 0.34094898,
       0.37859643]), array([0.38082507, 0.38082507, 0.31777534, ..., 0.45902873, 0.38082507,
       0.72579796]), array([0.4229022 , 0.37962541, 0.37962541, ..., 0.2425059 , 0.36244907,
       0.37962541])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.55 : [0.15384615384615385, 0.23892061246146848, 0.26507450902990226, 0.27408318976126017, 0.2970863431424831]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.55 : [0.525520976777018, 0.552893396155485, 0.5600038985470874, 0.5635242407829861, 0.5711105832805503]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.55 : [0.08838229915884432, 0.14410240780249925, 0.16357103708665732, 0.16984930754682448, 0.1872631707615206]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5932896890343698, 0.6985815602836879, 0.6985695708712614, 0.709480122324159, 0.7184056271981243]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.55 : [0.6292939153070236, 0.649955840654488, 0.6538372147073862, 0.6572537535443685, 0.6630177102217264]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.55 : [array([1.        , 0.41205615, 0.41205615, ..., 0.        , 0.41205615,
       0.41205615]), array([0.38938053, 0.38938053, 0.38938053, ..., 0.38938053, 0.38938053,
       0.        ]), array([0.3952307 , 0.3952307 , 0.3952307 , ..., 0.65217391, 1.        ,
       0.3952307 ]), array([0.39675828, 0.39675828, 0.        , ..., 0.        , 0.39675828,
       1.        ]), array([1.        , 0.39406622, 0.39406622, ..., 0.        , 0.39406622,
       0.39406622])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.55 : [0.22548563992936146, 0.2708219923788786, 0.2830833751196608, 0.30060192255862, 0.30827945402298845]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5234855758640646, 0.5411304957881182, 0.5492325404940921, 0.5546681706184321, 0.5584593181540376]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.55 : [0.14787272948921126, 0.181956720512039, 0.18908714451007855, 0.20413641632603258, 0.20981542598704314]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.55 : [0.47456964006259783, 0.5293491753857067, 0.5629079042784626, 0.569919945494805, 0.5808798646362098]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.55 : [0.6126528145772324, 0.6264119369683447, 0.6344768279644866, 0.6381257844094269, 0.6419374331799377]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.55 : [array([0.39538839, 0.40134755, 0.39519566, ..., 0.19674288, 0.39519566,
       0.39519566]), array([0.38259358, 0.4034177 , 0.38259358, ..., 0.38259358, 0.38259358,
       0.19649459]), array([0.37754481, 0.37754481, 0.37754481, ..., 0.5369887 , 0.13145201,
       0.41002097]), array([0.37941026, 0.37941026, 0.33888352, ..., 0.3383195 , 0.37941026,
       0.63700566]), array([0.35537567, 0.37831315, 0.37831315, ..., 0.15380434, 0.36462303,
       0.37831315])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.55 : [0.11157093196490649, 0.15972146665215972, 0.17682633128177683, 0.1927826272088567, 0.21186974789915966]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5175511918501533, 0.5351823348596938, 0.5387998458297671, 0.5442431681472032, 0.5492417297285284]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.55 : [0.06162379617213214, 0.08948491313623895, 0.1006028865477133, 0.11048746263193215, 0.12327343845495661]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5888177052999417, 0.742539200809307, 0.7296819787985865, 0.7555277430120985, 0.7531740104555639]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.55 : [0.6257844094268582, 0.6410077627481058, 0.6425184771998327, 0.6475154557709292, 0.6512341374982569]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.55 : [array([0.39351183, 0.39351183, 0.39351183, ..., 0.34631637, 0.39351183,
       0.39351183], dtype=float32), array([0.38116792, 0.38116792, 0.38116792, ..., 0.38116792, 0.38116792,
       0.53310776], dtype=float32), array([0.37877655, 0.37877655, 0.37877655, ..., 0.50555456, 0.12095393,
       0.37877655], dtype=float32), array([0.3818973, 0.3818973, 0.3818973, ..., 0.3818973, 0.3818973,
       0.6441345], dtype=float32), array([0.58808964, 0.37965652, 0.37965652, ..., 0.37965652, 0.37965652,
       0.37965652], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.55 : [0.18216786665351611, 0.20516221179351152, 0.19278866194247604, 0.1946902654867257, 0.2051040686120699]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5525875297141991, 0.6336104182003233, 0.6528307786687008, 0.6632876016260163, 0.6764302982989209]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.55 : [0.47701446280991733, 0.628633948108784, 0.6676290147961025, 0.6869918699186992, 0.7105072463768116]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.55 : [0.11258076313543826, 0.12258457787259981, 0.11266061750197917, 0.11341589896894637, 0.11985087397628652]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.55 : [0.6145586389624877, 0.6378468832798773, 0.6399386417514991, 0.6425649607214242, 0.6467252359038721]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.55 : [array([0.39681211, 0.41225537, 0.41225537, ..., 0.21739147, 0.41225537,
       0.41225537]), array([0.38948246, 0.38948246, 0.38948246, ..., 0.38948246, 0.38948246,
       0.50486627]), array([0.39488318, 0.39488318, 0.39488318, ..., 0.65114143, 0.37223797,
       0.39488318]), array([0.39681806, 0.39681806, 0.20511223, ..., 0.3907388 , 0.39681806,
       0.98596918]), array([0.57188787, 0.39376114, 0.39376114, ..., 0.05395143, 0.39097948,
       0.39376114])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.55 : [0.20513074484944535, 0.2684570218500337, 0.28072859396663, 0.28579618747312596, 0.3069894498869631]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5309045301727127, 0.5552536232775922, 0.560079925022095, 0.5621608141670552, 0.5693812436799236]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.55 : [0.5470153195985209, 0.6377772696089641, 0.6530249110320284, 0.6588105726872246, 0.6691991786447639]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.55 : [0.1262343045227356, 0.17000914355379457, 0.17879544485719506, 0.1824781892501983, 0.19918102921403252]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.55 : [0.6269697392274439, 0.6467252359038721, 0.6503277088272208, 0.6525589178636173, 0.6580207316506298]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.03
Logistic F1-score 6.765700838358582
Logistic ROCAUC score: 51.20592321731292
Logistic Recall score: 3.56718192627824
Logistic Precision Score: 65.46489563567363
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[31142   364]
 [18653   690]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.99      0.77     31506
           1       0.65      0.04      0.07     19343

    accuracy                           0.63     50849
   macro avg       0.64      0.51      0.42     50849
weighted avg       0.64      0.63      0.50     50849


Logistic Accuracy Score 62.601034435288796
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.19545602798461914 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.03
DCT F1-score 19.339662270015964
DCT ROCAUC score: 52.520967548324826
DCT Recall score: 11.900946078684797
DCT Precision Score: 51.5796549406229
DCT Confusion Matrix [[29345  2161]
 [17041  2302]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.93      0.75     31506
           1       0.52      0.12      0.19     19343

    accuracy                           0.62     50849
   macro avg       0.57      0.53      0.47     50849
weighted avg       0.59      0.62      0.54     50849


DCT Accuracy Score 62.23721213789848
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  0.49567532539367676 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.03
Naive F1-score 3.725460661746247
Naive ROCAUC score: 50.63684239874298
Naive Recall score: 1.9180065139843872
Naive Precision Score: 64.63414634146342
Naive Confusion Matrix [[31303   203]
 [18972   371]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.62      0.99      0.77     31506
           1       0.65      0.02      0.04     19343

    accuracy                           0.62     50849
   macro avg       0.63      0.51      0.40     50849
weighted avg       0.63      0.62      0.49     50849


Naive Accuracy Score 62.29031052724734
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.0548558235168457 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.03
XGB F1-Score 14.156922252967954
XGB ROCAUC Score: 57.309941130919974
XGB Recall score: 51.77930133855697
XGB Precision Score: 8.199348601561288
XGB Confusion Matrix [[30029 17757]
 [ 1477  1586]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.63      0.76     47786
           1       0.08      0.52      0.14      3063

    accuracy                           0.62     50849
   macro avg       0.52      0.57      0.45     50849
weighted avg       0.90      0.62      0.72     50849


XGB Accuracy Score 62.29031052724734
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  0.5674371719360352 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.03
RFC F1 score 14.80646034467202
RFC ROCAUC Score: 52.36601142031051
RFC Recall score: 58.12964930924548
RFC Precision Score: 8.483689189887816
RFC Confusion Matrix [[30324  1182]
 [17702  1641]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.96      0.76     31506
           1       0.58      0.08      0.15     19343

    accuracy                           0.63     50849
   macro avg       0.61      0.52      0.46     50849
weighted avg       0.61      0.63      0.53     50849


RFC Accuracy Score 62.862593168007244
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  173.04284048080444 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.65 : [array([0.36013462, 0.36013462, 0.36013462, ..., 0.36013462, 0.36013462,
       0.36013462])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.65 : [0.06765700838358582]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5120592321731292]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.65 : [0.0356718192627824]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6546489563567363]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6260103443528879]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.65 : [array([0.37312113, 0.37312113, 0.37312113, ..., 0.37312113, 0.37312113,
       0.37312113])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.65 : [0.19339662270015964]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5252096754832483]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.65 : [0.11900946078684796]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.65 : [0.515796549406229]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6223721213789848]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.65 : [array([0.35933504, 0.36626286, 0.35933504, ..., 0.36626286, 0.37489829,
       0.35933504])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.65 : [0.03725460661746247]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5063684239874298]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.65 : [0.019180065139843872]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6463414634146342]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6229031052724734]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.65 : [array([0.36279503, 0.36279503, 0.36279503, ..., 0.36279503, 0.36279503,
       0.36279503], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.65 : [0.14156922252967954]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5730994113091997]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5177930133855697]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.65 : [0.08199348601561288]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6217428071348502]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.65 : [array([0.37300152, 0.37300152, 0.37300152, ..., 0.37300152, 0.37300152,
       0.37300152])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.65 : [0.1480646034467202]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5236601142031051]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5812964930924548]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.65 : [0.08483689189887815]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6286259316800724]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.065
Logistic F1-score 17.977729081883638
Logistic ROCAUC score: 53.50252176191148
Logistic Recall score: 10.431262649852094
Logistic Precision Score: 65.00646830530401
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[30498  1082]
 [17259  2010]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.97      0.77     31580
           1       0.65      0.10      0.18     19269

    accuracy                           0.64     50849
   macro avg       0.64      0.54      0.47     50849
weighted avg       0.64      0.64      0.55     50849


Logistic Accuracy Score 63.930460776023125
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.4607667922973633 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.065
DCT F1-score 23.87486498379806
DCT ROCAUC score: 53.39848505300658
DCT Recall score: 15.486013804556542
DCT Precision Score: 52.0949720670391
DCT Confusion Matrix [[28836  2744]
 [16285  2984]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.91      0.75     31580
           1       0.52      0.15      0.24     19269

    accuracy                           0.63     50849
   macro avg       0.58      0.53      0.50     50849
weighted avg       0.59      0.63      0.56     50849


DCT Accuracy Score 62.577435151133756
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  0.9724290370941162 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.065
Naive F1-score 10.19187520934016
Naive ROCAUC score: 51.86895263489141
Naive Recall score: 5.527012299548498
Naive Precision Score: 65.33742331288343
Naive Confusion Matrix [[31015   565]
 [18204  1065]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.98      0.77     31580
           1       0.65      0.06      0.10     19269

    accuracy                           0.63     50849
   macro avg       0.64      0.52      0.43     50849
weighted avg       0.64      0.63      0.52     50849


Naive Accuracy Score 63.08875297449311
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.055904388427734375 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.065
XGB F1-Score 16.288832913518053
XGB ROCAUC Score: 59.078188470212154
XGB Recall score: 54.85119047619048
XGB Precision Score: 9.564585603819607
XGB Confusion Matrix [[30063 17426]
 [ 1517  1843]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.63      0.76     47489
           1       0.10      0.55      0.16      3360

    accuracy                           0.63     50849
   macro avg       0.52      0.59      0.46     50849
weighted avg       0.90      0.63      0.72     50849


XGB Accuracy Score 63.08875297449311
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  0.6761891841888428 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.065
RFC F1 score 21.82726080148957
RFC ROCAUC Score: 53.8691068792353
RFC Recall score: 59.124254928931684
RFC Precision Score: 13.384192225855
RFC Confusion Matrix [[29797  1783]
 [16690  2579]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.94      0.76     31580
           1       0.59      0.13      0.22     19269

    accuracy                           0.64     50849
   macro avg       0.62      0.54      0.49     50849
weighted avg       0.62      0.64      0.56     50849


RFC Accuracy Score 63.6708686503176
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  394.28890228271484 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.65 : [array([0.36013462, 0.36013462, 0.36013462, ..., 0.36013462, 0.36013462,
       0.36013462]), array([0.38000146, 0.31009313, 0.38000146, ..., 0.38000146, 0.33923178,
       0.50886122])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.65 : [0.06765700838358582, 0.1797772908188364]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5120592321731292, 0.5350252176191148]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.65 : [0.0356718192627824, 0.10431262649852094]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6546489563567363, 0.6500646830530401]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6260103443528879, 0.6393046077602312]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.65 : [array([0.37312113, 0.37312113, 0.37312113, ..., 0.37312113, 0.37312113,
       0.37312113]), array([0.39868745, 0.        , 0.39868745, ..., 0.39868745, 0.33333333,
       1.        ])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.65 : [0.19339662270015964, 0.23874864983798058]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5252096754832483, 0.5339848505300658]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.65 : [0.11900946078684796, 0.15486013804556542]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.65 : [0.515796549406229, 0.520949720670391]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6223721213789848, 0.6257743515113375]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.65 : [array([0.35933504, 0.36626286, 0.35933504, ..., 0.36626286, 0.37489829,
       0.35933504]), array([0.37844217, 0.24326782, 0.37844217, ..., 0.39672292, 0.2508338 ,
       0.47366343])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.65 : [0.03725460661746247, 0.10191875209340161]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5063684239874298, 0.5186895263489141]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.65 : [0.019180065139843872, 0.05527012299548498]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6463414634146342, 0.6533742331288344]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6229031052724734, 0.6308875297449311]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.65 : [array([0.36279503, 0.36279503, 0.36279503, ..., 0.36279503, 0.36279503,
       0.36279503], dtype=float32), array([0.38029858, 0.38029858, 0.38029858, ..., 0.38029858, 0.38029858,
       0.48274863], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.65 : [0.14156922252967954, 0.16288832913518053]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5730994113091997, 0.5907818847021216]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5177930133855697, 0.5485119047619048]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.65 : [0.08199348601561288, 0.09564585603819607]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6217428071348502, 0.6274656335424492]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.65 : [array([0.37300152, 0.37300152, 0.37300152, ..., 0.37300152, 0.37300152,
       0.37300152]), array([0.39794945, 0.14574919, 0.39794945, ..., 0.39794945, 0.32636218,
       0.49371696])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.65 : [0.1480646034467202, 0.21827260801489567]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5236601142031051, 0.538691068792353]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5812964930924548, 0.5912425492893169]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.65 : [0.08483689189887815, 0.13384192225855]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6286259316800724, 0.636708686503176]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.099
Logistic F1-score 20.625082421205327
Logistic ROCAUC score: 54.38809211926859
Logistic Recall score: 12.12528426710771
Logistic Precision Score: 68.97971184945604
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[30446  1055]
 [17002  2346]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.97      0.77     31501
           1       0.69      0.12      0.21     19348

    accuracy                           0.64     50849
   macro avg       0.67      0.54      0.49     50849
weighted avg       0.66      0.64      0.56     50849


Logistic Accuracy Score 64.48897716769258
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.20740771293640137 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.099
DCT F1-score 25.378594186366676
DCT ROCAUC score: 53.81470033107559
DCT Recall score: 16.673557990489975
DCT Precision Score: 53.10288065843621
DCT Confusion Matrix [[28652  2849]
 [16122  3226]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.91      0.75     31501
           1       0.53      0.17      0.25     19348

    accuracy                           0.63     50849
   macro avg       0.59      0.54      0.50     50849
weighted avg       0.60      0.63      0.56     50849


DCT Accuracy Score 62.69149835788315
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  1.4341988563537598 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.099
Naive F1-score 11.84041184041184
Naive ROCAUC score: 52.592193354537244
Naive Recall score: 6.419268141409964
Naive Precision Score: 76.14960147148989
Naive Confusion Matrix [[31112   389]
 [18106  1242]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.99      0.77     31501
           1       0.76      0.06      0.12     19348

    accuracy                           0.64     50849
   macro avg       0.70      0.53      0.44     50849
weighted avg       0.68      0.64      0.52     50849


Naive Accuracy Score 63.62760329603335
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.05784726142883301 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.099
XGB F1-Score 19.123819517313745
XGB ROCAUC Score: 62.899070474710285
XGB Recall score: 62.060158910329164
XGB Precision Score: 11.303493901178415
XGB Confusion Matrix [[30164 17161]
 [ 1337  2187]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.96      0.64      0.77     47325
           1       0.11      0.62      0.19      3524

    accuracy                           0.64     50849
   macro avg       0.54      0.63      0.48     50849
weighted avg       0.90      0.64      0.73     50849


XGB Accuracy Score 63.62760329603335
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  0.750993013381958 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.099
RFC F1 score 24.146392181326675
RFC ROCAUC Score: 54.65453874726286
RFC Recall score: 61.80540770704705
RFC Precision Score: 15.004134794293982
RFC Confusion Matrix [[29707  1794]
 [16445  2903]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.94      0.77     31501
           1       0.62      0.15      0.24     19348

    accuracy                           0.64     50849
   macro avg       0.63      0.55      0.50     50849
weighted avg       0.63      0.64      0.57     50849


RFC Accuracy Score 64.13105469134102
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  604.751490354538 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.65 : [array([0.36013462, 0.36013462, 0.36013462, ..., 0.36013462, 0.36013462,
       0.36013462]), array([0.38000146, 0.31009313, 0.38000146, ..., 0.38000146, 0.33923178,
       0.50886122]), array([0.6088552 , 0.37423564, 0.40110563, ..., 0.39469461, 0.52341815,
       0.31900519])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.65 : [0.06765700838358582, 0.1797772908188364, 0.20625082421205326]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5120592321731292, 0.5350252176191148, 0.5438809211926859]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.65 : [0.0356718192627824, 0.10431262649852094, 0.12125284267107711]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6546489563567363, 0.6500646830530401, 0.6897971184945604]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6260103443528879, 0.6393046077602312, 0.6448897716769258]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.65 : [array([0.37312113, 0.37312113, 0.37312113, ..., 0.37312113, 0.37312113,
       0.37312113]), array([0.39868745, 0.        , 0.39868745, ..., 0.39868745, 0.33333333,
       1.        ]), array([0.72727273, 0.39009371, 1.        , ..., 1.        , 0.        ,
       0.        ])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.65 : [0.19339662270015964, 0.23874864983798058, 0.25378594186366676]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5252096754832483, 0.5339848505300658, 0.5381470033107559]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.65 : [0.11900946078684796, 0.15486013804556542, 0.16673557990489973]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.65 : [0.515796549406229, 0.520949720670391, 0.5310288065843621]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6223721213789848, 0.6257743515113375, 0.6269149835788315]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.65 : [array([0.35933504, 0.36626286, 0.35933504, ..., 0.36626286, 0.37489829,
       0.35933504]), array([0.37844217, 0.24326782, 0.37844217, ..., 0.39672292, 0.2508338 ,
       0.47366343]), array([0.54000882, 0.37771178, 0.32657642, ..., 0.18934104, 0.55158434,
       0.19113816])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.65 : [0.03725460661746247, 0.10191875209340161, 0.1184041184041184]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5063684239874298, 0.5186895263489141, 0.5259219335453724]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.65 : [0.019180065139843872, 0.05527012299548498, 0.06419268141409964]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6463414634146342, 0.6533742331288344, 0.7614960147148988]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6229031052724734, 0.6308875297449311, 0.6362760329603335]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.65 : [array([0.36279503, 0.36279503, 0.36279503, ..., 0.36279503, 0.36279503,
       0.36279503], dtype=float32), array([0.38029858, 0.38029858, 0.38029858, ..., 0.38029858, 0.38029858,
       0.48274863], dtype=float32), array([0.557782  , 0.3754623 , 0.44041437, ..., 0.7280735 , 0.3754623 ,
       0.34519506], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.65 : [0.14156922252967954, 0.16288832913518053, 0.19123819517313745]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5730994113091997, 0.5907818847021216, 0.6289907047471028]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5177930133855697, 0.5485119047619048, 0.6206015891032917]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.65 : [0.08199348601561288, 0.09564585603819607, 0.11303493901178416]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6217428071348502, 0.6274656335424492, 0.636217034749946]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.65 : [array([0.37300152, 0.37300152, 0.37300152, ..., 0.37300152, 0.37300152,
       0.37300152]), array([0.39794945, 0.14574919, 0.39794945, ..., 0.39794945, 0.32636218,
       0.49371696]), array([0.72458506, 0.39014017, 0.70794319, ..., 0.38579338, 0.55117404,
       0.18793431])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.65 : [0.1480646034467202, 0.21827260801489567, 0.24146392181326676]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5236601142031051, 0.538691068792353, 0.5465453874726286]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5812964930924548, 0.5912425492893169, 0.6180540770704706]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.65 : [0.08483689189887815, 0.13384192225855, 0.15004134794293983]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6286259316800724, 0.636708686503176, 0.6413105469134103]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.132
Logistic F1-score 24.10878984170563
Logistic ROCAUC score: 55.36379212565643
Logistic Recall score: 14.567888433822384
Logistic Precision Score: 69.86573843858777
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[30348  1212]
 [16479  2810]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.96      0.77     31560
           1       0.70      0.15      0.24     19289

    accuracy                           0.65     50849
   macro avg       0.67      0.55      0.51     50849
weighted avg       0.67      0.65      0.57     50849


Logistic Accuracy Score 65.20875533442153
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.30614471435546875 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.132
DCT F1-score 26.91843488417365
DCT ROCAUC score: 54.30485549957517
DCT Recall score: 17.922131784955155
DCT Precision Score: 54.04940587867417
DCT Confusion Matrix [[28621  2939]
 [15832  3457]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.91      0.75     31560
           1       0.54      0.18      0.27     19289

    accuracy                           0.63     50849
   macro avg       0.59      0.54      0.51     50849
weighted avg       0.60      0.63      0.57     50849


DCT Accuracy Score 63.08481976046727
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  2.070491075515747 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.132
Naive F1-score 14.225549836218999
Naive ROCAUC score: 53.051286199683936
Naive Recall score: 7.8801389392918235
Naive Precision Score: 73.04180682364247
Naive Confusion Matrix [[30999   561]
 [17769  1520]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.98      0.77     31560
           1       0.73      0.08      0.14     19289

    accuracy                           0.64     50849
   macro avg       0.68      0.53      0.46     50849
weighted avg       0.67      0.64      0.53     50849


Naive Accuracy Score 63.95209345316525
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.05990028381347656 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.132
XGB F1-Score 18.86362640732466
XGB ROCAUC Score: 62.316841511502744
XGB Recall score: 60.853589598643296
XGB Precision Score: 11.16180206335217
XGB Confusion Matrix [[30175 17136]
 [ 1385  2153]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.96      0.64      0.77     47311
           1       0.11      0.61      0.19      3538

    accuracy                           0.64     50849
   macro avg       0.53      0.62      0.48     50849
weighted avg       0.90      0.64      0.73     50849


XGB Accuracy Score 63.95209345316525
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  0.8277862071990967 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.132
RFC F1 score 25.515931979527817
RFC ROCAUC Score: 55.08458198460991
RFC Recall score: 62.58351893095768
RFC Precision Score: 16.024677277204624
RFC Confusion Matrix [[29712  1848]
 [16198  3091]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.94      0.77     31560
           1       0.63      0.16      0.26     19289

    accuracy                           0.65     50849
   macro avg       0.64      0.55      0.51     50849
weighted avg       0.64      0.65      0.57     50849


RFC Accuracy Score 64.5106098448347
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  824.137327671051 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.65 : [array([0.36013462, 0.36013462, 0.36013462, ..., 0.36013462, 0.36013462,
       0.36013462]), array([0.38000146, 0.31009313, 0.38000146, ..., 0.38000146, 0.33923178,
       0.50886122]), array([0.6088552 , 0.37423564, 0.40110563, ..., 0.39469461, 0.52341815,
       0.31900519]), array([0.38703397, 0.41546609, 0.38703397, ..., 0.38703397, 0.38703397,
       0.38703397])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.65 : [0.06765700838358582, 0.1797772908188364, 0.20625082421205326, 0.2410878984170563]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5120592321731292, 0.5350252176191148, 0.5438809211926859, 0.5536379212565643]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.65 : [0.0356718192627824, 0.10431262649852094, 0.12125284267107711, 0.14567888433822385]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6546489563567363, 0.6500646830530401, 0.6897971184945604, 0.6986573843858777]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6260103443528879, 0.6393046077602312, 0.6448897716769258, 0.6520875533442152]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.65 : [array([0.37312113, 0.37312113, 0.37312113, ..., 0.37312113, 0.37312113,
       0.37312113]), array([0.39868745, 0.        , 0.39868745, ..., 0.39868745, 0.33333333,
       1.        ]), array([0.72727273, 0.39009371, 1.        , ..., 1.        , 0.        ,
       0.        ]), array([0.39972006, 1.        , 0.39972006, ..., 0.39972006, 0.39972006,
       0.39972006])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.65 : [0.19339662270015964, 0.23874864983798058, 0.25378594186366676, 0.2691843488417365]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5252096754832483, 0.5339848505300658, 0.5381470033107559, 0.5430485549957517]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.65 : [0.11900946078684796, 0.15486013804556542, 0.16673557990489973, 0.17922131784955156]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.65 : [0.515796549406229, 0.520949720670391, 0.5310288065843621, 0.5404940587867417]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6223721213789848, 0.6257743515113375, 0.6269149835788315, 0.6308481976046727]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.65 : [array([0.35933504, 0.36626286, 0.35933504, ..., 0.36626286, 0.37489829,
       0.35933504]), array([0.37844217, 0.24326782, 0.37844217, ..., 0.39672292, 0.2508338 ,
       0.47366343]), array([0.54000882, 0.37771178, 0.32657642, ..., 0.18934104, 0.55158434,
       0.19113816]), array([0.38524114, 0.38224482, 0.40774336, ..., 0.40774336, 0.38524114,
       0.38524114])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.65 : [0.03725460661746247, 0.10191875209340161, 0.1184041184041184, 0.14225549836218998]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5063684239874298, 0.5186895263489141, 0.5259219335453724, 0.5305128619968393]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.65 : [0.019180065139843872, 0.05527012299548498, 0.06419268141409964, 0.07880138939291824]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6463414634146342, 0.6533742331288344, 0.7614960147148988, 0.7304180682364247]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6229031052724734, 0.6308875297449311, 0.6362760329603335, 0.6395209345316525]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.65 : [array([0.36279503, 0.36279503, 0.36279503, ..., 0.36279503, 0.36279503,
       0.36279503], dtype=float32), array([0.38029858, 0.38029858, 0.38029858, ..., 0.38029858, 0.38029858,
       0.48274863], dtype=float32), array([0.557782  , 0.3754623 , 0.44041437, ..., 0.7280735 , 0.3754623 ,
       0.34519506], dtype=float32), array([0.3881432, 0.3881432, 0.3881432, ..., 0.3881432, 0.3881432,
       0.3881432], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.65 : [0.14156922252967954, 0.16288832913518053, 0.19123819517313745, 0.1886362640732466]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5730994113091997, 0.5907818847021216, 0.6289907047471028, 0.6231684151150274]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5177930133855697, 0.5485119047619048, 0.6206015891032917, 0.608535895986433]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.65 : [0.08199348601561288, 0.09564585603819607, 0.11303493901178416, 0.11161802063352169]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6217428071348502, 0.6274656335424492, 0.636217034749946, 0.6357647151369742]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.65 : [array([0.37300152, 0.37300152, 0.37300152, ..., 0.37300152, 0.37300152,
       0.37300152]), array([0.39794945, 0.14574919, 0.39794945, ..., 0.39794945, 0.32636218,
       0.49371696]), array([0.72458506, 0.39014017, 0.70794319, ..., 0.38579338, 0.55117404,
       0.18793431]), array([0.39969817, 0.76453434, 0.39969817, ..., 0.39969817, 0.39969817,
       0.39969817])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.65 : [0.1480646034467202, 0.21827260801489567, 0.24146392181326676, 0.25515931979527817]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5236601142031051, 0.538691068792353, 0.5465453874726286, 0.5508458198460991]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5812964930924548, 0.5912425492893169, 0.6180540770704706, 0.6258351893095768]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.65 : [0.08483689189887815, 0.13384192225855, 0.15004134794293983, 0.16024677277204624]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6286259316800724, 0.636708686503176, 0.6413105469134103, 0.6451060984483471]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.15
Logistic F1-score 25.004269854824933
Logistic ROCAUC score: 55.628699002738045
Logistic Recall score: 15.21829521829522
Logistic Precision Score: 70.04784688995215
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[30357  1252]
 [16312  2928]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.96      0.78     31609
           1       0.70      0.15      0.25     19240

    accuracy                           0.65     50849
   macro avg       0.68      0.56      0.51     50849
weighted avg       0.67      0.65      0.58     50849


Logistic Accuracy Score 65.45851442506245
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.1984701156616211 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.15
DCT F1-score 28.35210224837314
DCT ROCAUC score: 55.04887108457294
DCT Recall score: 18.908523908523907
DCT Precision Score: 56.640199283823755
DCT Confusion Matrix [[28824  2785]
 [15602  3638]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.91      0.76     31609
           1       0.57      0.19      0.28     19240

    accuracy                           0.64     50849
   macro avg       0.61      0.55      0.52     50849
weighted avg       0.62      0.64      0.58     50849


DCT Accuracy Score 63.83999685342878
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  2.2889010906219482 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.15
Naive F1-score 14.82655725475569
Naive ROCAUC score: 53.15444695249497
Naive Recall score: 8.264033264033264
Naive Precision Score: 72.01086956521739
Naive Confusion Matrix [[30991   618]
 [17650  1590]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.98      0.77     31609
           1       0.72      0.08      0.15     19240

    accuracy                           0.64     50849
   macro avg       0.68      0.53      0.46     50849
weighted avg       0.67      0.64      0.54     50849


Naive Accuracy Score 64.07402308796634
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.058844566345214844 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.15
XGB F1-Score 19.298947087831536
XGB ROCAUC Score: 65.28506094483558
XGB Recall score: 66.44233710614867
XGB Precision Score: 11.28898128898129
XGB Confusion Matrix [[30512 17068]
 [ 1097  2172]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.97      0.64      0.77     47580
           1       0.11      0.66      0.19      3269

    accuracy                           0.64     50849
   macro avg       0.54      0.65      0.48     50849
weighted avg       0.91      0.64      0.73     50849


XGB Accuracy Score 64.07402308796634
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  0.870673418045044 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.15
RFC F1 score 25.920079754091553
RFC ROCAUC Score: 55.39685498399789
RFC Recall score: 64.54282167976831
RFC Precision Score: 16.216216216216218
RFC Confusion Matrix [[29895  1714]
 [16120  3120]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.65      0.95      0.77     31609
           1       0.65      0.16      0.26     19240

    accuracy                           0.65     50849
   macro avg       0.65      0.55      0.51     50849
weighted avg       0.65      0.65      0.58     50849


RFC Accuracy Score 64.92753053157388
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  928.6176733970642 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.65 : [array([0.36013462, 0.36013462, 0.36013462, ..., 0.36013462, 0.36013462,
       0.36013462]), array([0.38000146, 0.31009313, 0.38000146, ..., 0.38000146, 0.33923178,
       0.50886122]), array([0.6088552 , 0.37423564, 0.40110563, ..., 0.39469461, 0.52341815,
       0.31900519]), array([0.38703397, 0.41546609, 0.38703397, ..., 0.38703397, 0.38703397,
       0.38703397]), array([0.38345551, 0.30631489, 0.38345551, ..., 0.38345551, 0.38345551,
       0.38345551])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.65 : [0.06765700838358582, 0.1797772908188364, 0.20625082421205326, 0.2410878984170563, 0.25004269854824934]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5120592321731292, 0.5350252176191148, 0.5438809211926859, 0.5536379212565643, 0.5562869900273805]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.65 : [0.0356718192627824, 0.10431262649852094, 0.12125284267107711, 0.14567888433822385, 0.1521829521829522]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6546489563567363, 0.6500646830530401, 0.6897971184945604, 0.6986573843858777, 0.7004784688995215]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6260103443528879, 0.6393046077602312, 0.6448897716769258, 0.6520875533442152, 0.6545851442506244]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.65 : [array([0.37312113, 0.37312113, 0.37312113, ..., 0.37312113, 0.37312113,
       0.37312113]), array([0.39868745, 0.        , 0.39868745, ..., 0.39868745, 0.33333333,
       1.        ]), array([0.72727273, 0.39009371, 1.        , ..., 1.        , 0.        ,
       0.        ]), array([0.39972006, 1.        , 0.39972006, ..., 0.39972006, 0.39972006,
       0.39972006]), array([0.4015444, 0.       , 0.4015444, ..., 0.4015444, 0.4015444,
       0.4015444])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.65 : [0.19339662270015964, 0.23874864983798058, 0.25378594186366676, 0.2691843488417365, 0.2835210224837314]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5252096754832483, 0.5339848505300658, 0.5381470033107559, 0.5430485549957517, 0.5504887108457294]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.65 : [0.11900946078684796, 0.15486013804556542, 0.16673557990489973, 0.17922131784955156, 0.18908523908523908]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.65 : [0.515796549406229, 0.520949720670391, 0.5310288065843621, 0.5404940587867417, 0.5664019928382376]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6223721213789848, 0.6257743515113375, 0.6269149835788315, 0.6308481976046727, 0.6383999685342878]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.65 : [array([0.35933504, 0.36626286, 0.35933504, ..., 0.36626286, 0.37489829,
       0.35933504]), array([0.37844217, 0.24326782, 0.37844217, ..., 0.39672292, 0.2508338 ,
       0.47366343]), array([0.54000882, 0.37771178, 0.32657642, ..., 0.18934104, 0.55158434,
       0.19113816]), array([0.38524114, 0.38224482, 0.40774336, ..., 0.40774336, 0.38524114,
       0.38524114]), array([0.37898415, 0.24390401, 0.37898415, ..., 0.37898415, 0.37898415,
       0.37898415])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.65 : [0.03725460661746247, 0.10191875209340161, 0.1184041184041184, 0.14225549836218998, 0.1482655725475569]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5063684239874298, 0.5186895263489141, 0.5259219335453724, 0.5305128619968393, 0.5315444695249497]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.65 : [0.019180065139843872, 0.05527012299548498, 0.06419268141409964, 0.07880138939291824, 0.08264033264033264]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6463414634146342, 0.6533742331288344, 0.7614960147148988, 0.7304180682364247, 0.720108695652174]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6229031052724734, 0.6308875297449311, 0.6362760329603335, 0.6395209345316525, 0.6407402308796634]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.65 : [array([0.36279503, 0.36279503, 0.36279503, ..., 0.36279503, 0.36279503,
       0.36279503], dtype=float32), array([0.38029858, 0.38029858, 0.38029858, ..., 0.38029858, 0.38029858,
       0.48274863], dtype=float32), array([0.557782  , 0.3754623 , 0.44041437, ..., 0.7280735 , 0.3754623 ,
       0.34519506], dtype=float32), array([0.3881432, 0.3881432, 0.3881432, ..., 0.3881432, 0.3881432,
       0.3881432], dtype=float32), array([0.38445258, 0.3312822 , 0.38445258, ..., 0.38445258, 0.38445258,
       0.38445258], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.65 : [0.14156922252967954, 0.16288832913518053, 0.19123819517313745, 0.1886362640732466, 0.19298947087831536]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5730994113091997, 0.5907818847021216, 0.6289907047471028, 0.6231684151150274, 0.6528506094483557]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5177930133855697, 0.5485119047619048, 0.6206015891032917, 0.608535895986433, 0.6644233710614867]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.65 : [0.08199348601561288, 0.09564585603819607, 0.11303493901178416, 0.11161802063352169, 0.1128898128898129]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6217428071348502, 0.6274656335424492, 0.636217034749946, 0.6357647151369742, 0.6427658361029716]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.65 : [array([0.37300152, 0.37300152, 0.37300152, ..., 0.37300152, 0.37300152,
       0.37300152]), array([0.39794945, 0.14574919, 0.39794945, ..., 0.39794945, 0.32636218,
       0.49371696]), array([0.72458506, 0.39014017, 0.70794319, ..., 0.38579338, 0.55117404,
       0.18793431]), array([0.39969817, 0.76453434, 0.39969817, ..., 0.39969817, 0.39969817,
       0.39969817]), array([0.40158664, 0.21686875, 0.40158664, ..., 0.40158664, 0.40158664,
       0.40158664])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.65 : [0.1480646034467202, 0.21827260801489567, 0.24146392181326676, 0.25515931979527817, 0.2592007975409155]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5236601142031051, 0.538691068792353, 0.5465453874726286, 0.5508458198460991, 0.5539685498399789]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.65 : [0.5812964930924548, 0.5912425492893169, 0.6180540770704706, 0.6258351893095768, 0.645428216797683]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.65 : [0.08483689189887815, 0.13384192225855, 0.15004134794293983, 0.16024677277204624, 0.16216216216216217]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.65 : [0.6286259316800724, 0.636708686503176, 0.6413105469134103, 0.6451060984483471, 0.6492753053157387]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.023
Logistic F1-score 6.743094039510977
Logistic ROCAUC score: 51.02918032001734
Logistic Recall score: 3.5755944369672497
Logistic Precision Score: 59.08080059303188
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[35830   552]
 [21493   797]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.98      0.76     36382
           1       0.59      0.04      0.07     22290

    accuracy                           0.62     58672
   macro avg       0.61      0.51      0.42     58672
weighted avg       0.61      0.62      0.50     58672


Logistic Accuracy Score 62.42671120807199
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.20345520973205566 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.023
DCT F1-score 18.743013738145894
DCT ROCAUC score: 51.92144240151097
DCT Recall score: 11.659937191565724
DCT Precision Score: 47.74940290281095
DCT Confusion Matrix [[33538  2844]
 [19691  2599]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.92      0.75     36382
           1       0.48      0.12      0.19     22290

    accuracy                           0.62     58672
   macro avg       0.55      0.52      0.47     58672
weighted avg       0.57      0.62      0.54     58672


DCT Accuracy Score 61.591559858194714
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  0.3949425220489502 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.023
Naive F1-score 5.762755210775329
Naive ROCAUC score: 50.83609359821517
Naive Recall score: 3.0327501121579186
Naive Precision Score: 57.72843723313408
Naive Confusion Matrix [[35887   495]
 [21614   676]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.62      0.99      0.76     36382
           1       0.58      0.03      0.06     22290

    accuracy                           0.62     58672
   macro avg       0.60      0.51      0.41     58672
weighted avg       0.61      0.62      0.50     58672


Naive Accuracy Score 62.31763021543496
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.06485915184020996 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.023
XGB F1-Score 14.118822534778266
XGB ROCAUC Score: 55.99752589885644
XGB Recall score: 49.22293676312969
XGB Precision Score: 8.241363840287125
XGB Confusion Matrix [[34487 20453]
 [ 1895  1837]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.63      0.76     54940
           1       0.08      0.49      0.14      3732

    accuracy                           0.62     58672
   macro avg       0.52      0.56      0.45     58672
weighted avg       0.89      0.62      0.72     58672


XGB Accuracy Score 62.31763021543496
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  0.5724678039550781 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.023
RFC F1 score 14.655472588695012
RFC ROCAUC Score: 51.96307110983426
RFC Recall score: 53.247118358166986
RFC Precision Score: 8.497083894122925
RFC Confusion Matrix [[34719  1663]
 [20396  1894]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.95      0.76     36382
           1       0.53      0.08      0.15     22290

    accuracy                           0.62     58672
   macro avg       0.58      0.52      0.45     58672
weighted avg       0.59      0.62      0.53     58672


RFC Accuracy Score 62.402849740932645
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  148.35397863388062 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.75 : [array([0.32112077, 0.37299547, 0.37299547, ..., 0.61001209, 0.37299547,
       0.37980418])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.75 : [0.06743094039510977]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5102918032001734]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.75 : [0.0357559443696725]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5908080059303188]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.75 : [0.6242671120807199]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.75 : [array([0.        , 0.38657407, 0.38657407, ..., 1.        , 0.38657407,
       1.        ])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.75 : [0.18743013738145894]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5192144240151098]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.75 : [0.11659937191565725]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.75 : [0.4774940290281095]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.75 : [0.6159155985819471]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.75 : [array([0.27944072, 0.37354086, 0.37354086, ..., 0.56073165, 0.37354086,
       0.34384339])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.75 : [0.05762755210775329]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5083609359821517]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.75 : [0.030327501121579184]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5772843723313408]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.75 : [0.6231763021543496]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.75 : [array([0.06542612, 0.37809375, 0.37809375, ..., 0.7741108 , 0.37809375,
       0.40562338], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.75 : [0.14118822534778266]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5599752589885644]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.75 : [0.4922293676312969]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.75 : [0.08241363840287125]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.75 : [0.6191028088355605]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.75 : [array([0.25804649, 0.38764669, 0.38764669, ..., 0.96591302, 0.38764669,
       0.44996279])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.75 : [0.14655472588695012]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5196307110983426]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5324711835816699]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.75 : [0.08497083894122925]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.75 : [0.6240284974093264]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.056
Logistic F1-score 14.651247128984163
Logistic ROCAUC score: 52.932311719767696
Logistic Recall score: 8.210640411886912
Logistic Precision Score: 67.96261682242991
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[35673   857]
 [20324  1818]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.98      0.77     36530
           1       0.68      0.08      0.15     22142

    accuracy                           0.64     58672
   macro avg       0.66      0.53      0.46     58672
weighted avg       0.65      0.64      0.54     58672


Logistic Accuracy Score 63.89930460867193
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.26425957679748535 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.056
DCT F1-score 24.016951507572596
DCT ROCAUC score: 53.44152565961588
DCT Recall score: 15.612862433384517
DCT Precision Score: 52.01625037616612
DCT Confusion Matrix [[33341  3189]
 [18685  3457]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.91      0.75     36530
           1       0.52      0.16      0.24     22142

    accuracy                           0.63     58672
   macro avg       0.58      0.53      0.50     58672
weighted avg       0.60      0.63      0.56     58672


DCT Accuracy Score 62.718161985274065
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  0.8816573619842529 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.056
Naive F1-score 8.893213741749873
Naive ROCAUC score: 51.766966732384056
Naive Recall score: 4.746635353626592
Naive Precision Score: 70.34805890227577
Naive Confusion Matrix [[36087   443]
 [21091  1051]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.99      0.77     36530
           1       0.70      0.05      0.09     22142

    accuracy                           0.63     58672
   macro avg       0.67      0.52      0.43     58672
weighted avg       0.66      0.63      0.51     58672


Naive Accuracy Score 63.297654758658304
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.06483125686645508 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.056
XGB F1-Score 16.117216117216117
XGB ROCAUC Score: 59.28146805170642
XGB Recall score: 55.10150276825732
XGB Precision Score: 9.439075060970103
XGB Confusion Matrix [[34827 20052]
 [ 1703  2090]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.63      0.76     54879
           1       0.09      0.55      0.16      3793

    accuracy                           0.63     58672
   macro avg       0.52      0.59      0.46     58672
weighted avg       0.90      0.63      0.72     58672


XGB Accuracy Score 63.297654758658304
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  0.6382553577423096 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.056
RFC F1 score 19.4317624419877
RFC ROCAUC Score: 53.370175105742454
RFC Recall score: 59.04609034625086
RFC Precision Score: 11.629482431577996
RFC Confusion Matrix [[34744  1786]
 [19567  2575]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.95      0.76     36530
           1       0.59      0.12      0.19     22142

    accuracy                           0.64     58672
   macro avg       0.62      0.53      0.48     58672
weighted avg       0.62      0.64      0.55     58672


RFC Accuracy Score 63.60614944095991
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  356.5606384277344 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.75 : [array([0.32112077, 0.37299547, 0.37299547, ..., 0.61001209, 0.37299547,
       0.37980418]), array([0.26976519, 0.49294994, 0.3724499 , ..., 0.3724499 , 0.3724499 ,
       0.3724499 ])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.75 : [0.06743094039510977, 0.14651247128984163]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5102918032001734, 0.529323117197677]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.75 : [0.0357559443696725, 0.08210640411886912]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5908080059303188, 0.6796261682242991]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.75 : [0.6242671120807199, 0.6389930460867194]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.75 : [array([0.        , 0.38657407, 0.38657407, ..., 1.        , 0.38657407,
       1.        ]), array([0.        , 1.        , 0.38011418, ..., 0.38011418, 0.38011418,
       0.38011418])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.75 : [0.18743013738145894, 0.24016951507572595]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5192144240151098, 0.5344152565961587]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.75 : [0.11659937191565725, 0.15612862433384517]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.75 : [0.4774940290281095, 0.5201625037616612]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.75 : [0.6159155985819471, 0.6271816198527407]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.75 : [array([0.27944072, 0.37354086, 0.37354086, ..., 0.56073165, 0.37354086,
       0.34384339]), array([0.10772647, 0.34737213, 0.38582968, ..., 0.37488584, 0.37488584,
       0.37488584])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.75 : [0.05762755210775329, 0.08893213741749874]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5083609359821517, 0.5176696673238406]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.75 : [0.030327501121579184, 0.04746635353626592]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5772843723313408, 0.7034805890227577]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.75 : [0.6231763021543496, 0.6329765475865831]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.75 : [array([0.06542612, 0.37809375, 0.37809375, ..., 0.7741108 , 0.37809375,
       0.40562338], dtype=float32), array([0.05268267, 0.78898495, 0.37674302, ..., 0.37674302, 0.37674302,
       0.37674302], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.75 : [0.14118822534778266, 0.16117216117216118]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5599752589885644, 0.5928146805170642]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.75 : [0.4922293676312969, 0.5510150276825732]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.75 : [0.08241363840287125, 0.09439075060970102]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.75 : [0.6191028088355605, 0.6292098445595855]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.75 : [array([0.25804649, 0.38764669, 0.38764669, ..., 0.96591302, 0.38764669,
       0.44996279]), array([0.18474124, 0.35637941, 0.38066005, ..., 0.38066005, 0.38066005,
       0.38066005])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.75 : [0.14655472588695012, 0.194317624419877]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5196307110983426, 0.5337017510574246]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5324711835816699, 0.5904609034625086]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.75 : [0.08497083894122925, 0.11629482431577996]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.75 : [0.6240284974093264, 0.6360614944095991]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.076
Logistic F1-score 19.51427024518524
Logistic ROCAUC score: 54.06014670127621
Logistic Recall score: 11.396693468244647
Logistic Precision Score: 67.8225806451613
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[35337  1197]
 [19615  2523]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.97      0.77     36534
           1       0.68      0.11      0.20     22138

    accuracy                           0.65     58672
   macro avg       0.66      0.54      0.48     58672
weighted avg       0.66      0.65      0.55     58672


Logistic Accuracy Score 64.52822470684482
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.16356158256530762 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.076
DCT F1-score 23.922065133291127
DCT ROCAUC score: 53.71929962727566
DCT Recall score: 15.362724726714246
DCT Precision Score: 54.018424396442185
DCT Confusion Matrix [[33639  2895]
 [18737  3401]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.92      0.76     36534
           1       0.54      0.15      0.24     22138

    accuracy                           0.63     58672
   macro avg       0.59      0.54      0.50     58672
weighted avg       0.60      0.63      0.56     58672


DCT Accuracy Score 63.130624488682855
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  1.142181396484375 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.076
Naive F1-score 12.005119101680222
Naive ROCAUC score: 52.42036702416332
Naive Recall score: 6.567892311861957
Naive Precision Score: 69.73621103117506
Naive Confusion Matrix [[35903   631]
 [20684  1454]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.98      0.77     36534
           1       0.70      0.07      0.12     22138

    accuracy                           0.64     58672
   macro avg       0.67      0.52      0.45     58672
weighted avg       0.66      0.64      0.53     58672


Naive Accuracy Score 63.670916280338155
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.06585526466369629 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.076
XGB F1-Score 18.44041944709247
XGB ROCAUC Score: 61.518029617744986
XGB Recall score: 59.16320039148519
XGB Precision Score: 10.922395880386665
XGB Confusion Matrix [[34865 19720]
 [ 1669  2418]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.64      0.77     54585
           1       0.11      0.59      0.18      4087

    accuracy                           0.64     58672
   macro avg       0.53      0.62      0.47     58672
weighted avg       0.90      0.64      0.72     58672


XGB Accuracy Score 63.670916280338155
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  0.7071075439453125 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.076
RFC F1 score 22.18031210709267
RFC ROCAUC Score: 54.16626081332401
RFC Recall score: 61.15415986949429
RFC Precision Score: 13.54684253320083
RFC Confusion Matrix [[34629  1905]
 [19139  2999]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.95      0.77     36534
           1       0.61      0.14      0.22     22138

    accuracy                           0.64     58672
   macro avg       0.63      0.54      0.49     58672
weighted avg       0.63      0.64      0.56     58672


RFC Accuracy Score 64.13280610853559
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  490.03056812286377 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.75 : [array([0.32112077, 0.37299547, 0.37299547, ..., 0.61001209, 0.37299547,
       0.37980418]), array([0.26976519, 0.49294994, 0.3724499 , ..., 0.3724499 , 0.3724499 ,
       0.3724499 ]), array([0.38369909, 0.30690645, 0.38369909, ..., 0.38369909, 0.38369909,
       0.38369909])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.75 : [0.06743094039510977, 0.14651247128984163, 0.19514270245185242]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5102918032001734, 0.529323117197677, 0.5406014670127621]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.75 : [0.0357559443696725, 0.08210640411886912, 0.11396693468244647]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5908080059303188, 0.6796261682242991, 0.6782258064516129]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.75 : [0.6242671120807199, 0.6389930460867194, 0.6452822470684483]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.75 : [array([0.        , 0.38657407, 0.38657407, ..., 1.        , 0.38657407,
       1.        ]), array([0.        , 1.        , 0.38011418, ..., 0.38011418, 0.38011418,
       0.38011418]), array([0.40334639, 0.        , 0.40334639, ..., 0.40334639, 0.40334639,
       0.40334639])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.75 : [0.18743013738145894, 0.24016951507572595, 0.2392206513329113]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5192144240151098, 0.5344152565961587, 0.5371929962727566]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.75 : [0.11659937191565725, 0.15612862433384517, 0.15362724726714247]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.75 : [0.4774940290281095, 0.5201625037616612, 0.5401842439644219]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.75 : [0.6159155985819471, 0.6271816198527407, 0.6313062448868285]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.75 : [array([0.27944072, 0.37354086, 0.37354086, ..., 0.56073165, 0.37354086,
       0.34384339]), array([0.10772647, 0.34737213, 0.38582968, ..., 0.37488584, 0.37488584,
       0.37488584]), array([0.38284272, 0.16759318, 0.38284272, ..., 0.41367906, 0.38284272,
       0.38284272])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.75 : [0.05762755210775329, 0.08893213741749874, 0.12005119101680221]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5083609359821517, 0.5176696673238406, 0.5242036702416332]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.75 : [0.030327501121579184, 0.04746635353626592, 0.06567892311861957]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5772843723313408, 0.7034805890227577, 0.6973621103117505]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.75 : [0.6231763021543496, 0.6329765475865831, 0.6367091628033815]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.75 : [array([0.06542612, 0.37809375, 0.37809375, ..., 0.7741108 , 0.37809375,
       0.40562338], dtype=float32), array([0.05268267, 0.78898495, 0.37674302, ..., 0.37674302, 0.37674302,
       0.37674302], dtype=float32), array([0.38597015, 0.11871442, 0.38597015, ..., 0.38597015, 0.38597015,
       0.38597015], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.75 : [0.14118822534778266, 0.16117216117216118, 0.1844041944709247]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5599752589885644, 0.5928146805170642, 0.6151802961774498]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.75 : [0.4922293676312969, 0.5510150276825732, 0.5916320039148519]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.75 : [0.08241363840287125, 0.09439075060970102, 0.10922395880386665]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.75 : [0.6191028088355605, 0.6292098445595855, 0.6354479138260158]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.75 : [array([0.25804649, 0.38764669, 0.38764669, ..., 0.96591302, 0.38764669,
       0.44996279]), array([0.18474124, 0.35637941, 0.38066005, ..., 0.38066005, 0.38066005,
       0.38066005]), array([0.40313075, 0.09087015, 0.40313075, ..., 0.40313075, 0.40313075,
       0.40313075])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.75 : [0.14655472588695012, 0.194317624419877, 0.2218031210709267]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5196307110983426, 0.5337017510574246, 0.5416626081332401]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5324711835816699, 0.5904609034625086, 0.611541598694943]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.75 : [0.08497083894122925, 0.11629482431577996, 0.1354684253320083]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.75 : [0.6240284974093264, 0.6360614944095991, 0.6413280610853559]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.104
Logistic F1-score 21.761814744801512
Logistic ROCAUC score: 54.677382154549946
Logistic Recall score: 12.920894316243153
Logistic Precision Score: 68.9176245210728
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[35100  1298]
 [19396  2878]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.96      0.77     36398
           1       0.69      0.13      0.22     22274

    accuracy                           0.65     58672
   macro avg       0.67      0.55      0.49     58672
weighted avg       0.66      0.65      0.56     58672


Logistic Accuracy Score 64.72934278701936
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.23537182807922363 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.104
DCT F1-score 25.635752964562343
DCT ROCAUC score: 54.04904596905946
DCT Recall score: 16.790877255993536
DCT Precision Score: 54.171494785631516
DCT Confusion Matrix [[33234  3164]
 [18534  3740]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.91      0.75     36398
           1       0.54      0.17      0.26     22274

    accuracy                           0.63     58672
   macro avg       0.59      0.54      0.51     58672
weighted avg       0.60      0.63      0.57     58672


DCT Accuracy Score 63.01813471502591
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  1.632683277130127 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.104
Naive F1-score 12.038707561095622
Naive ROCAUC score: 52.40791050374249
Naive Recall score: 6.590643799946126
Naive Precision Score: 69.44181646168401
Naive Confusion Matrix [[35752   646]
 [20806  1468]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.98      0.77     36398
           1       0.69      0.07      0.12     22274

    accuracy                           0.63     58672
   macro avg       0.66      0.52      0.44     58672
weighted avg       0.66      0.63      0.52     58672


Naive Accuracy Score 63.4374147804745
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.07086324691772461 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.104
XGB F1-Score 18.44004123239033
XGB ROCAUC Score: 62.6763521312421
XGB Recall score: 61.62286297524879
XGB Precision Score: 10.842237586423632
XGB Confusion Matrix [[34894 19859]
 [ 1504  2415]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.96      0.64      0.77     54753
           1       0.11      0.62      0.18      3919

    accuracy                           0.64     58672
   macro avg       0.53      0.63      0.48     58672
weighted avg       0.90      0.64      0.73     58672


XGB Accuracy Score 63.4374147804745
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  0.7998237609863281 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.104
RFC F1 score 23.603518806791442
RFC ROCAUC Score: 54.44828601010834
RFC Recall score: 60.94597120957188
RFC Precision Score: 14.635898356828589
RFC Confusion Matrix [[34309  2089]
 [19014  3260]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.94      0.76     36398
           1       0.61      0.15      0.24     22274

    accuracy                           0.64     58672
   macro avg       0.63      0.54      0.50     58672
weighted avg       0.63      0.64      0.56     58672


RFC Accuracy Score 64.03224706844833
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  672.7316887378693 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.75 : [array([0.32112077, 0.37299547, 0.37299547, ..., 0.61001209, 0.37299547,
       0.37980418]), array([0.26976519, 0.49294994, 0.3724499 , ..., 0.3724499 , 0.3724499 ,
       0.3724499 ]), array([0.38369909, 0.30690645, 0.38369909, ..., 0.38369909, 0.38369909,
       0.38369909]), array([0.38810198, 0.38810198, 0.38810198, ..., 0.38810198, 0.50564802,
       0.38810198])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.75 : [0.06743094039510977, 0.14651247128984163, 0.19514270245185242, 0.21761814744801514]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5102918032001734, 0.529323117197677, 0.5406014670127621, 0.5467738215454995]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.75 : [0.0357559443696725, 0.08210640411886912, 0.11396693468244647, 0.12920894316243153]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5908080059303188, 0.6796261682242991, 0.6782258064516129, 0.689176245210728]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.75 : [0.6242671120807199, 0.6389930460867194, 0.6452822470684483, 0.6472934278701936]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.75 : [array([0.        , 0.38657407, 0.38657407, ..., 1.        , 0.38657407,
       1.        ]), array([0.        , 1.        , 0.38011418, ..., 0.38011418, 0.38011418,
       0.38011418]), array([0.40334639, 0.        , 0.40334639, ..., 0.40334639, 0.40334639,
       0.40334639]), array([0.40146558, 0.40146558, 0.40146558, ..., 0.40146558, 1.        ,
       0.40146558])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.75 : [0.18743013738145894, 0.24016951507572595, 0.2392206513329113, 0.2563575296456234]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5192144240151098, 0.5344152565961587, 0.5371929962727566, 0.5404904596905946]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.75 : [0.11659937191565725, 0.15612862433384517, 0.15362724726714247, 0.16790877255993536]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.75 : [0.4774940290281095, 0.5201625037616612, 0.5401842439644219, 0.5417149478563151]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.75 : [0.6159155985819471, 0.6271816198527407, 0.6313062448868285, 0.6301813471502591]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.75 : [array([0.27944072, 0.37354086, 0.37354086, ..., 0.56073165, 0.37354086,
       0.34384339]), array([0.10772647, 0.34737213, 0.38582968, ..., 0.37488584, 0.37488584,
       0.37488584]), array([0.38284272, 0.16759318, 0.38284272, ..., 0.41367906, 0.38284272,
       0.38284272]), array([0.40385668, 0.40385668, 0.38291334, ..., 0.38291334, 0.47358443,
       0.38291334])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.75 : [0.05762755210775329, 0.08893213741749874, 0.12005119101680221, 0.12038707561095623]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5083609359821517, 0.5176696673238406, 0.5242036702416332, 0.5240791050374249]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.75 : [0.030327501121579184, 0.04746635353626592, 0.06567892311861957, 0.06590643799946126]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5772843723313408, 0.7034805890227577, 0.6973621103117505, 0.6944181646168401]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.75 : [0.6231763021543496, 0.6329765475865831, 0.6367091628033815, 0.634374147804745]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.75 : [array([0.06542612, 0.37809375, 0.37809375, ..., 0.7741108 , 0.37809375,
       0.40562338], dtype=float32), array([0.05268267, 0.78898495, 0.37674302, ..., 0.37674302, 0.37674302,
       0.37674302], dtype=float32), array([0.38597015, 0.11871442, 0.38597015, ..., 0.38597015, 0.38597015,
       0.38597015], dtype=float32), array([0.39116162, 0.39116162, 0.39116162, ..., 0.39116162, 0.39116162,
       0.39116162], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.75 : [0.14118822534778266, 0.16117216117216118, 0.1844041944709247, 0.18440041232390333]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5599752589885644, 0.5928146805170642, 0.6151802961774498, 0.626763521312421]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.75 : [0.4922293676312969, 0.5510150276825732, 0.5916320039148519, 0.6162286297524879]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.75 : [0.08241363840287125, 0.09439075060970102, 0.10922395880386665, 0.10842237586423632]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.75 : [0.6191028088355605, 0.6292098445595855, 0.6354479138260158, 0.6358910553586038]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.75 : [array([0.25804649, 0.38764669, 0.38764669, ..., 0.96591302, 0.38764669,
       0.44996279]), array([0.18474124, 0.35637941, 0.38066005, ..., 0.38066005, 0.38066005,
       0.38066005]), array([0.40313075, 0.09087015, 0.40313075, ..., 0.40313075, 0.40313075,
       0.40313075]), array([0.40154371, 0.40154371, 0.40154371, ..., 0.40154371, 0.90335083,
       0.40154371])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.75 : [0.14655472588695012, 0.194317624419877, 0.2218031210709267, 0.2360351880679144]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5196307110983426, 0.5337017510574246, 0.5416626081332401, 0.5444828601010834]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5324711835816699, 0.5904609034625086, 0.611541598694943, 0.6094597120957188]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.75 : [0.08497083894122925, 0.11629482431577996, 0.1354684253320083, 0.1463589835682859]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.75 : [0.6240284974093264, 0.6360614944095991, 0.6413280610853559, 0.6403224706844832]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.113
Logistic F1-score 22.272812091808174
Logistic ROCAUC score: 54.70336502457624
Logistic Recall score: 13.328568876183668
Logistic Precision Score: 67.71046063081462
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[34861  1423]
 [19404  2984]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.96      0.77     36284
           1       0.68      0.13      0.22     22388

    accuracy                           0.65     58672
   macro avg       0.66      0.55      0.50     58672
weighted avg       0.66      0.65      0.56     58672


Logistic Accuracy Score 64.50265884919553
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.3779897689819336 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.113
DCT F1-score 27.286738591436034
DCT ROCAUC score: 54.42818911346884
DCT Recall score: 18.18831516884045
DCT Precision Score: 54.59908822740681
DCT Confusion Matrix [[32898  3386]
 [18316  4072]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.91      0.75     36284
           1       0.55      0.18      0.27     22388

    accuracy                           0.63     58672
   macro avg       0.59      0.54      0.51     58672
weighted avg       0.61      0.63      0.57     58672


DCT Accuracy Score 63.01131715298609
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  1.7563002109527588 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.113
Naive F1-score 12.790792588360134
Naive ROCAUC score: 52.7458668967798
Naive Recall score: 6.99928533142755
Naive Precision Score: 74.12488174077578
Naive Confusion Matrix [[35737   547]
 [20821  1567]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.98      0.77     36284
           1       0.74      0.07      0.13     22388

    accuracy                           0.64     58672
   macro avg       0.69      0.53      0.45     58672
weighted avg       0.67      0.64      0.52     58672


Naive Accuracy Score 63.58058358331061
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.06687712669372559 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.113
XGB F1-Score 20.247811247959635
XGB ROCAUC Score: 61.703052666551514
XGB Recall score: 59.74168126094571
XGB Precision Score: 12.189565838842237
XGB Confusion Matrix [[34445 19659]
 [ 1839  2729]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.64      0.76     54104
           1       0.12      0.60      0.20      4568

    accuracy                           0.63     58672
   macro avg       0.54      0.62      0.48     58672
weighted avg       0.88      0.63      0.72     58672


XGB Accuracy Score 63.58058358331061
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  0.8088366985321045 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.113
RFC F1 score 25.209003215434084
RFC ROCAUC Score: 55.021211971458875
RFC Recall score: 62.97750803284541
RFC Precision Score: 15.758442022512059
RFC Confusion Matrix [[34210  2074]
 [18860  3528]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.94      0.77     36284
           1       0.63      0.16      0.25     22388

    accuracy                           0.64     58672
   macro avg       0.64      0.55      0.51     58672
weighted avg       0.64      0.64      0.57     58672


RFC Accuracy Score 64.32028906463049
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  730.0073263645172 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.75 : [array([0.32112077, 0.37299547, 0.37299547, ..., 0.61001209, 0.37299547,
       0.37980418]), array([0.26976519, 0.49294994, 0.3724499 , ..., 0.3724499 , 0.3724499 ,
       0.3724499 ]), array([0.38369909, 0.30690645, 0.38369909, ..., 0.38369909, 0.38369909,
       0.38369909]), array([0.38810198, 0.38810198, 0.38810198, ..., 0.38810198, 0.50564802,
       0.38810198]), array([0.37358147, 0.37358147, 0.37358147, ..., 0.37358147, 0.49604055,
       0.41039325])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.75 : [0.06743094039510977, 0.14651247128984163, 0.19514270245185242, 0.21761814744801514, 0.22272812091808175]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5102918032001734, 0.529323117197677, 0.5406014670127621, 0.5467738215454995, 0.5470336502457624]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.75 : [0.0357559443696725, 0.08210640411886912, 0.11396693468244647, 0.12920894316243153, 0.1332856887618367]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5908080059303188, 0.6796261682242991, 0.6782258064516129, 0.689176245210728, 0.6771046063081462]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.75 : [0.6242671120807199, 0.6389930460867194, 0.6452822470684483, 0.6472934278701936, 0.6450265884919553]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.75 : [array([0.        , 0.38657407, 0.38657407, ..., 1.        , 0.38657407,
       1.        ]), array([0.        , 1.        , 0.38011418, ..., 0.38011418, 0.38011418,
       0.38011418]), array([0.40334639, 0.        , 0.40334639, ..., 0.40334639, 0.40334639,
       0.40334639]), array([0.40146558, 0.40146558, 0.40146558, ..., 0.40146558, 1.        ,
       0.40146558]), array([0.39222118, 0.39222118, 0.39222118, ..., 0.39222118, 0.5       ,
       1.        ])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.75 : [0.18743013738145894, 0.24016951507572595, 0.2392206513329113, 0.2563575296456234, 0.2728673859143603]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5192144240151098, 0.5344152565961587, 0.5371929962727566, 0.5404904596905946, 0.5442818911346884]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.75 : [0.11659937191565725, 0.15612862433384517, 0.15362724726714247, 0.16790877255993536, 0.1818831516884045]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.75 : [0.4774940290281095, 0.5201625037616612, 0.5401842439644219, 0.5417149478563151, 0.5459908822740681]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.75 : [0.6159155985819471, 0.6271816198527407, 0.6313062448868285, 0.6301813471502591, 0.6301131715298609]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.75 : [array([0.27944072, 0.37354086, 0.37354086, ..., 0.56073165, 0.37354086,
       0.34384339]), array([0.10772647, 0.34737213, 0.38582968, ..., 0.37488584, 0.37488584,
       0.37488584]), array([0.38284272, 0.16759318, 0.38284272, ..., 0.41367906, 0.38284272,
       0.38284272]), array([0.40385668, 0.40385668, 0.38291334, ..., 0.38291334, 0.47358443,
       0.38291334]), array([0.37391108, 0.37391108, 0.37391108, ..., 0.37391108, 0.41187067,
       0.31482603])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.75 : [0.05762755210775329, 0.08893213741749874, 0.12005119101680221, 0.12038707561095623, 0.12790792588360134]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5083609359821517, 0.5176696673238406, 0.5242036702416332, 0.5240791050374249, 0.527458668967798]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.75 : [0.030327501121579184, 0.04746635353626592, 0.06567892311861957, 0.06590643799946126, 0.0699928533142755]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5772843723313408, 0.7034805890227577, 0.6973621103117505, 0.6944181646168401, 0.7412488174077578]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.75 : [0.6231763021543496, 0.6329765475865831, 0.6367091628033815, 0.634374147804745, 0.6358058358331061]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.75 : [array([0.06542612, 0.37809375, 0.37809375, ..., 0.7741108 , 0.37809375,
       0.40562338], dtype=float32), array([0.05268267, 0.78898495, 0.37674302, ..., 0.37674302, 0.37674302,
       0.37674302], dtype=float32), array([0.38597015, 0.11871442, 0.38597015, ..., 0.38597015, 0.38597015,
       0.38597015], dtype=float32), array([0.39116162, 0.39116162, 0.39116162, ..., 0.39116162, 0.39116162,
       0.39116162], dtype=float32), array([0.3729806 , 0.3729806 , 0.3729806 , ..., 0.3729806 , 0.41490775,
       0.548717  ], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.75 : [0.14118822534778266, 0.16117216117216118, 0.1844041944709247, 0.18440041232390333, 0.20247811247959635]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5599752589885644, 0.5928146805170642, 0.6151802961774498, 0.626763521312421, 0.6170305266655152]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.75 : [0.4922293676312969, 0.5510150276825732, 0.5916320039148519, 0.6162286297524879, 0.5974168126094571]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.75 : [0.08241363840287125, 0.09439075060970102, 0.10922395880386665, 0.10842237586423632, 0.12189565838842237]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.75 : [0.6191028088355605, 0.6292098445595855, 0.6354479138260158, 0.6358910553586038, 0.6335901281701664]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.75 : [array([0.25804649, 0.38764669, 0.38764669, ..., 0.96591302, 0.38764669,
       0.44996279]), array([0.18474124, 0.35637941, 0.38066005, ..., 0.38066005, 0.38066005,
       0.38066005]), array([0.40313075, 0.09087015, 0.40313075, ..., 0.40313075, 0.40313075,
       0.40313075]), array([0.40154371, 0.40154371, 0.40154371, ..., 0.40154371, 0.90335083,
       0.40154371]), array([0.39207454, 0.39207454, 0.39207454, ..., 0.39207454, 0.50418252,
       0.37271556])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.75 : [0.14655472588695012, 0.194317624419877, 0.2218031210709267, 0.2360351880679144, 0.25209003215434084]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5196307110983426, 0.5337017510574246, 0.5416626081332401, 0.5444828601010834, 0.5502121197145887]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.75 : [0.5324711835816699, 0.5904609034625086, 0.611541598694943, 0.6094597120957188, 0.6297750803284541]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.75 : [0.08497083894122925, 0.11629482431577996, 0.1354684253320083, 0.1463589835682859, 0.1575844202251206]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.75 : [0.6240284974093264, 0.6360614944095991, 0.6413280610853559, 0.6403224706844832, 0.6432028906463049]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.01
Logistic F1-score 1.2959921885402337
Logistic ROCAUC score: 50.11301564392072
Logistic Recall score: 0.6568292244016556
Logistic Precision Score: 48.18481848184818
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[36287   157]
 [22082   146]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.62      1.00      0.77     36444
           1       0.48      0.01      0.01     22228

    accuracy                           0.62     58672
   macro avg       0.55      0.50      0.39     58672
weighted avg       0.57      0.62      0.48     58672


Logistic Accuracy Score 62.09605944914098
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.31809306144714355 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.01
DCT F1-score 14.798595643474648
DCT ROCAUC score: 51.25195544318174
DCT Recall score: 8.817707396077019
DCT Precision Score: 45.99859187984041
DCT Confusion Matrix [[34143  2301]
 [20268  1960]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.94      0.75     36444
           1       0.46      0.09      0.15     22228

    accuracy                           0.62     58672
   macro avg       0.54      0.51      0.45     58672
weighted avg       0.56      0.62      0.52     58672


DCT Accuracy Score 61.53361058085629
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  0.24439787864685059 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.01
Naive F1-score 2.1253141672913265
Naive ROCAUC score: 50.25399578197255
Naive Recall score: 1.0842181032931437
Naive Precision Score: 53.43680709534369
Naive Confusion Matrix [[36234   210]
 [21987   241]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.62      0.99      0.77     36444
           1       0.53      0.01      0.02     22228

    accuracy                           0.62     58672
   macro avg       0.58      0.50      0.39     58672
weighted avg       0.59      0.62      0.48     58672


Naive Accuracy Score 62.16764385055904
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.06488466262817383 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.01
XGB F1-Score 12.450402557879734
XGB ROCAUC Score: 52.89808802523773
XGB Recall score: 43.31278477619941
XGB Precision Score: 7.2701097714594205
XGB Confusion Matrix [[34329 20612]
 [ 2115  1616]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.94      0.62      0.75     54941
           1       0.07      0.43      0.12      3731

    accuracy                           0.61     58672
   macro avg       0.51      0.53      0.44     58672
weighted avg       0.89      0.61      0.71     58672


XGB Accuracy Score 62.16764385055904
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  0.5674839019775391 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.01
RFC F1 score 8.874671916010499
RFC ROCAUC Score: 50.960373615339435
RFC Recall score: 50.18552875695733
RFC Precision Score: 4.867734389058845
RFC Confusion Matrix [[35370  1074]
 [21146  1082]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.97      0.76     36444
           1       0.50      0.05      0.09     22228

    accuracy                           0.62     58672
   macro avg       0.56      0.51      0.42     58672
weighted avg       0.58      0.62      0.51     58672


RFC Accuracy Score 62.128442868830106
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  74.37997031211853 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.85 : [array([0.37505582, 0.37505582, 0.41795115, ..., 0.46990733, 0.37505582,
       0.37505582])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.85 : [0.012959921885402336]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5011301564392072]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.85 : [0.006568292244016556]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.85 : [0.48184818481848185]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.85 : [0.6209605944914098]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.85 : [array([0.4015748, 0.4015748, 0.       , ..., 1.       , 0.4015748,
       0.4015748])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.85 : [0.1479859564347465]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5125195544318174]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.85 : [0.0881770739607702]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.85 : [0.4599859187984041]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.85 : [0.6153361058085629]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.85 : [array([0.37595908, 0.37932546, 0.37850725, ..., 0.46623632, 0.37595908,
       0.37790202])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.85 : [0.021253141672913266]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5025399578197255]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.85 : [0.010842181032931438]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5343680709534369]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.85 : [0.6216764385055904]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.85 : [array([0.37302387, 0.37302387, 0.5259797 , ..., 0.61480224, 0.37302387,
       0.37302387], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.85 : [0.12450402557879735]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5289808802523773]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.85 : [0.4331278477619941]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.85 : [0.07270109771459421]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.85 : [0.6126431688028361]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.85 : [array([0.4020728 , 0.4020728 , 0.40726793, ..., 0.69840899, 0.4020728 ,
       0.4020728 ])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.85 : [0.08874671916010499]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5096037361533944]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5018552875695733]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.85 : [0.04867734389058845]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.85 : [0.621284428688301]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.02
Logistic F1-score 8.59981631460299
Logistic ROCAUC score: 51.342154033751854
Logistic Recall score: 4.63713308121736
Logistic Precision Score: 59.127439724454646
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[35748   712]
 [21182  1030]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.98      0.77     36460
           1       0.59      0.05      0.09     22212

    accuracy                           0.63     58672
   macro avg       0.61      0.51      0.43     58672
weighted avg       0.61      0.63      0.51     58672


Logistic Accuracy Score 62.68407417507499
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.13763046264648438 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.02
DCT F1-score 19.23266109198229
DCT ROCAUC score: 51.34347576078084
DCT Recall score: 12.322168197370791
DCT Precision Score: 43.791999999999994
DCT Confusion Matrix [[32947  3513]
 [19475  2737]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.90      0.74     36460
           1       0.44      0.12      0.19     22212

    accuracy                           0.61     58672
   macro avg       0.53      0.51      0.47     58672
weighted avg       0.56      0.61      0.53     58672


DCT Accuracy Score 60.81947095718571
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  0.35610175132751465 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.02
Naive F1-score 6.457101535582117
Naive ROCAUC score: 50.97074108286191
Naive Recall score: 3.4170718530524042
Naive Precision Score: 58.51966075558982
Naive Confusion Matrix [[35922   538]
 [21453   759]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.99      0.77     36460
           1       0.59      0.03      0.06     22212

    accuracy                           0.63     58672
   macro avg       0.61      0.51      0.42     58672
weighted avg       0.61      0.63      0.50     58672


Naive Accuracy Score 62.51874829560949
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.06482648849487305 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.02
XGB F1-Score 15.65036110490656
XGB ROCAUC Score: 53.989363154716344
XGB Recall score: 45.204301075268816
XGB Precision Score: 9.463353142445525
XGB Confusion Matrix [[33912 20110]
 [ 2548  2102]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.93      0.63      0.75     54022
           1       0.09      0.45      0.16      4650

    accuracy                           0.61     58672
   macro avg       0.51      0.54      0.45     58672
weighted avg       0.86      0.61      0.70     58672


XGB Accuracy Score 62.51874829560949
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  0.5664863586425781 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.02
RFC F1 score 15.673550406535098
RFC ROCAUC Score: 51.971896951917685
RFC Recall score: 51.518193224592224
RFC Precision Score: 9.242751665766253
RFC Confusion Matrix [[34528  1932]
 [20159  2053]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.95      0.76     36460
           1       0.52      0.09      0.16     22212

    accuracy                           0.62     58672
   macro avg       0.57      0.52      0.46     58672
weighted avg       0.59      0.62      0.53     58672


RFC Accuracy Score 62.34830924461413
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  133.811918258667 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.85 : [array([0.37505582, 0.37505582, 0.41795115, ..., 0.46990733, 0.37505582,
       0.37505582]), array([0.37603933, 0.37603933, 0.45033936, ..., 0.37603933, 0.42891015,
       0.37603933])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.85 : [0.012959921885402336, 0.0859981631460299]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5011301564392072, 0.5134215403375185]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.85 : [0.006568292244016556, 0.0463713308121736]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.85 : [0.48184818481848185, 0.5912743972445464]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.85 : [0.6209605944914098, 0.6268407417507499]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.85 : [array([0.4015748, 0.4015748, 0.       , ..., 1.       , 0.4015748,
       0.4015748]), array([0.38018742, 0.38018742, 1.        , ..., 0.38018742, 1.        ,
       0.38018742])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.85 : [0.1479859564347465, 0.19232661091982292]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5125195544318174, 0.5134347576078084]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.85 : [0.0881770739607702, 0.1232216819737079]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.85 : [0.4599859187984041, 0.43792]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.85 : [0.6153361058085629, 0.6081947095718571]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.85 : [array([0.37595908, 0.37932546, 0.37850725, ..., 0.46623632, 0.37595908,
       0.37790202]), array([0.38107417, 0.38496768, 0.37036953, ..., 0.38107417, 0.33077551,
       0.38107417])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.85 : [0.021253141672913266, 0.06457101535582117]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5025399578197255, 0.5097074108286191]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.85 : [0.010842181032931438, 0.034170718530524044]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5343680709534369, 0.5851966075558982]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.85 : [0.6216764385055904, 0.6251874829560949]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.85 : [array([0.37302387, 0.37302387, 0.5259797 , ..., 0.61480224, 0.37302387,
       0.37302387], dtype=float32), array([0.37731642, 0.37731642, 0.27030224, ..., 0.37731642, 0.92886144,
       0.37731642], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.85 : [0.12450402557879735, 0.1565036110490656]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5289808802523773, 0.5398936315471634]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.85 : [0.4331278477619941, 0.45204301075268816]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.85 : [0.07270109771459421, 0.09463353142445526]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.85 : [0.6126431688028361, 0.6138191982547041]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.85 : [array([0.4020728 , 0.4020728 , 0.40726793, ..., 0.69840899, 0.4020728 ,
       0.4020728 ]), array([0.38028059, 0.38028059, 0.35395211, ..., 0.38028059, 0.35673611,
       0.38028059])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.85 : [0.08874671916010499, 0.15673550406535097]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5096037361533944, 0.5197189695191768]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5018552875695733, 0.5151819322459222]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.85 : [0.04867734389058845, 0.09242751665766252]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.85 : [0.621284428688301, 0.6234830924461413]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.03
Logistic F1-score 6.566604127579738
Logistic ROCAUC score: 51.26042476248786
Logistic Recall score: 3.445806855813121
Logistic Precision Score: 69.62025316455697
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[35990   336]
 [21576   770]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.99      0.77     36326
           1       0.70      0.03      0.07     22346

    accuracy                           0.63     58672
   macro avg       0.66      0.51      0.42     58672
weighted avg       0.65      0.63      0.50     58672


Logistic Accuracy Score 62.65339514589583
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.21140098571777344 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.03
DCT F1-score 19.405840522687072
DCT ROCAUC score: 52.34082198327753
DCT Recall score: 12.028998478474895
DCT Precision Score: 50.17733806234833
DCT Confusion Matrix [[33657  2669]
 [19658  2688]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.93      0.75     36326
           1       0.50      0.12      0.19     22346

    accuracy                           0.62     58672
   macro avg       0.57      0.52      0.47     58672
weighted avg       0.58      0.62      0.54     58672


DCT Accuracy Score 61.946073084265066
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  0.5147716999053955 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.03
Naive F1-score 3.9961775692815573
Naive ROCAUC score: 50.731959269421765
Naive Recall score: 2.0585339658104362
Naive Precision Score: 68.04733727810651
Naive Confusion Matrix [[36110   216]
 [21886   460]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.62      0.99      0.77     36326
           1       0.68      0.02      0.04     22346

    accuracy                           0.62     58672
   macro avg       0.65      0.51      0.40     58672
weighted avg       0.64      0.62      0.49     58672


Naive Accuracy Score 62.32956094900464
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.06383132934570312 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.03
XGB F1-Score 14.736518430257139
XGB ROCAUC Score: 57.53857123847841
XGB Recall score: 52.22010351402887
XGB Precision Score: 8.578716548823055
XGB Confusion Matrix [[34572 20429]
 [ 1754  1917]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.63      0.76     55001
           1       0.09      0.52      0.15      3671

    accuracy                           0.62     58672
   macro avg       0.52      0.58      0.45     58672
weighted avg       0.90      0.62      0.72     58672


XGB Accuracy Score 62.32956094900464
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  0.5844330787658691 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.03
RFC F1 score 14.399190094229422
RFC ROCAUC Score: 52.09046238449743
RFC Recall score: 55.42565947242206
RFC Precision Score: 8.274411527790209
RFC Confusion Matrix [[34839  1487]
 [20497  1849]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.96      0.76     36326
           1       0.55      0.08      0.14     22346

    accuracy                           0.63     58672
   macro avg       0.59      0.52      0.45     58672
weighted avg       0.60      0.63      0.53     58672


RFC Accuracy Score 62.53067902917917
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  191.56429386138916 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.85 : [array([0.37505582, 0.37505582, 0.41795115, ..., 0.46990733, 0.37505582,
       0.37505582]), array([0.37603933, 0.37603933, 0.45033936, ..., 0.37603933, 0.42891015,
       0.37603933]), array([0.35732138, 0.35732138, 0.35732138, ..., 0.35732138, 0.35732138,
       0.35732138])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.85 : [0.012959921885402336, 0.0859981631460299, 0.06566604127579738]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5011301564392072, 0.5134215403375185, 0.5126042476248786]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.85 : [0.006568292244016556, 0.0463713308121736, 0.03445806855813121]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.85 : [0.48184818481848185, 0.5912743972445464, 0.6962025316455697]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.85 : [0.6209605944914098, 0.6268407417507499, 0.6265339514589583]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.85 : [array([0.4015748, 0.4015748, 0.       , ..., 1.       , 0.4015748,
       0.4015748]), array([0.38018742, 0.38018742, 1.        , ..., 0.38018742, 1.        ,
       0.38018742]), array([0.37421665, 0.37421665, 0.37421665, ..., 0.37421665, 0.37421665,
       0.37421665])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.85 : [0.1479859564347465, 0.19232661091982292, 0.19405840522687073]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5125195544318174, 0.5134347576078084, 0.5234082198327753]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.85 : [0.0881770739607702, 0.1232216819737079, 0.12028998478474895]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.85 : [0.4599859187984041, 0.43792, 0.5017733806234833]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.85 : [0.6153361058085629, 0.6081947095718571, 0.6194607308426506]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.85 : [array([0.37595908, 0.37932546, 0.37850725, ..., 0.46623632, 0.37595908,
       0.37790202]), array([0.38107417, 0.38496768, 0.37036953, ..., 0.38107417, 0.33077551,
       0.38107417]), array([0.35763001, 0.35763001, 0.35763001, ..., 0.35763001, 0.35763001,
       0.35763001])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.85 : [0.021253141672913266, 0.06457101535582117, 0.039961775692815574]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5025399578197255, 0.5097074108286191, 0.5073195926942177]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.85 : [0.010842181032931438, 0.034170718530524044, 0.02058533965810436]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5343680709534369, 0.5851966075558982, 0.6804733727810651]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.85 : [0.6216764385055904, 0.6251874829560949, 0.6232956094900464]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.85 : [array([0.37302387, 0.37302387, 0.5259797 , ..., 0.61480224, 0.37302387,
       0.37302387], dtype=float32), array([0.37731642, 0.37731642, 0.27030224, ..., 0.37731642, 0.92886144,
       0.37731642], dtype=float32), array([0.359433, 0.359433, 0.359433, ..., 0.359433, 0.359433, 0.359433],
      dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.85 : [0.12450402557879735, 0.1565036110490656, 0.1473651843025714]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5289808802523773, 0.5398936315471634, 0.5753857123847841]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.85 : [0.4331278477619941, 0.45204301075268816, 0.5222010351402887]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.85 : [0.07270109771459421, 0.09463353142445526, 0.08578716548823055]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.85 : [0.6126431688028361, 0.6138191982547041, 0.6219150531769839]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.85 : [array([0.4020728 , 0.4020728 , 0.40726793, ..., 0.69840899, 0.4020728 ,
       0.4020728 ]), array([0.38028059, 0.38028059, 0.35395211, ..., 0.38028059, 0.35673611,
       0.38028059]), array([0.37437591, 0.37437591, 0.37437591, ..., 0.37437591, 0.37437591,
       0.37437591])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.85 : [0.08874671916010499, 0.15673550406535097, 0.14399190094229422]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5096037361533944, 0.5197189695191768, 0.5209046238449743]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5018552875695733, 0.5151819322459222, 0.5542565947242206]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.85 : [0.04867734389058845, 0.09242751665766252, 0.08274411527790208]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.85 : [0.621284428688301, 0.6234830924461413, 0.6253067902917917]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.05
Logistic F1-score 16.052984309705902
Logistic ROCAUC score: 53.07802427482884
Logistic Recall score: 9.155911318972883
Logistic Precision Score: 65.06871204857782
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[35342  1093]
 [20201  2036]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.97      0.77     36435
           1       0.65      0.09      0.16     22237

    accuracy                           0.64     58672
   macro avg       0.64      0.53      0.46     58672
weighted avg       0.64      0.64      0.54     58672


Logistic Accuracy Score 63.70670848104718
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.23633050918579102 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.05
DCT F1-score 23.68161907025705
DCT ROCAUC score: 52.72869303543444
DCT Recall score: 15.681072087062104
DCT Precision Score: 48.34997226844149
DCT Confusion Matrix [[32710  3725]
 [18750  3487]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.90      0.74     36435
           1       0.48      0.16      0.24     22237

    accuracy                           0.62     58672
   macro avg       0.56      0.53      0.49     58672
weighted avg       0.58      0.62      0.55     58672


DCT Accuracy Score 61.693823288791926
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  0.7898862361907959 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.05
Naive F1-score 11.083164969282151
Naive ROCAUC score: 52.099800174670584
Naive Recall score: 6.0439807527993885
Naive Precision Score: 66.66666666666666
Naive Confusion Matrix [[35763   672]
 [20893  1344]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.98      0.77     36435
           1       0.67      0.06      0.11     22237

    accuracy                           0.63     58672
   macro avg       0.65      0.52      0.44     58672
weighted avg       0.64      0.63      0.52     58672


Naive Accuracy Score 63.244818652849744
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.06682395935058594 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.05
XGB F1-Score 18.10139756170086
XGB ROCAUC Score: 57.75393468694332
XGB Recall score: 52.174844653953286
XGB Precision Score: 10.950218104960202
XGB Confusion Matrix [[34203 19802]
 [ 2232  2435]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.94      0.63      0.76     54005
           1       0.11      0.52      0.18      4667

    accuracy                           0.62     58672
   macro avg       0.52      0.58      0.47     58672
weighted avg       0.87      0.62      0.71     58672


XGB Accuracy Score 63.244818652849744
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  0.6622285842895508 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.05
RFC F1 score 21.963898916967516
RFC ROCAUC Score: 53.51759655374667
RFC Recall score: 55.6836902800659
RFC Precision Score: 13.679902864595045
RFC Confusion Matrix [[34014  2421]
 [19195  3042]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.93      0.76     36435
           1       0.56      0.14      0.22     22237

    accuracy                           0.63     58672
   macro avg       0.60      0.54      0.49     58672
weighted avg       0.61      0.63      0.55     58672


RFC Accuracy Score 63.1578947368421
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  319.00416016578674 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.85 : [array([0.37505582, 0.37505582, 0.41795115, ..., 0.46990733, 0.37505582,
       0.37505582]), array([0.37603933, 0.37603933, 0.45033936, ..., 0.37603933, 0.42891015,
       0.37603933]), array([0.35732138, 0.35732138, 0.35732138, ..., 0.35732138, 0.35732138,
       0.35732138]), array([0.40022647, 0.39940225, 0.39440279, ..., 0.39440279, 0.39440279,
       0.39440279])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.85 : [0.012959921885402336, 0.0859981631460299, 0.06566604127579738, 0.16052984309705903]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5011301564392072, 0.5134215403375185, 0.5126042476248786, 0.5307802427482884]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.85 : [0.006568292244016556, 0.0463713308121736, 0.03445806855813121, 0.09155911318972883]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.85 : [0.48184818481848185, 0.5912743972445464, 0.6962025316455697, 0.6506871204857783]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.85 : [0.6209605944914098, 0.6268407417507499, 0.6265339514589583, 0.6370670848104718]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.85 : [array([0.4015748, 0.4015748, 0.       , ..., 1.       , 0.4015748,
       0.4015748]), array([0.38018742, 0.38018742, 1.        , ..., 0.38018742, 1.        ,
       0.38018742]), array([0.37421665, 0.37421665, 0.37421665, ..., 0.37421665, 0.37421665,
       0.37421665]), array([0.40274117, 1.        , 0.40274117, ..., 0.40274117, 0.40274117,
       0.40274117])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.85 : [0.1479859564347465, 0.19232661091982292, 0.19405840522687073, 0.2368161907025705]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5125195544318174, 0.5134347576078084, 0.5234082198327753, 0.5272869303543444]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.85 : [0.0881770739607702, 0.1232216819737079, 0.12028998478474895, 0.15681072087062103]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.85 : [0.4599859187984041, 0.43792, 0.5017733806234833, 0.4834997226844149]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.85 : [0.6153361058085629, 0.6081947095718571, 0.6194607308426506, 0.6169382328879193]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.85 : [array([0.37595908, 0.37932546, 0.37850725, ..., 0.46623632, 0.37595908,
       0.37790202]), array([0.38107417, 0.38496768, 0.37036953, ..., 0.38107417, 0.33077551,
       0.38107417]), array([0.35763001, 0.35763001, 0.35763001, ..., 0.35763001, 0.35763001,
       0.35763001]), array([0.41002373, 0.28782858, 0.39503963, ..., 0.4044755 , 0.39503963,
       0.4044755 ])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.85 : [0.021253141672913266, 0.06457101535582117, 0.039961775692815574, 0.11083164969282151]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5025399578197255, 0.5097074108286191, 0.5073195926942177, 0.5209980017467059]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.85 : [0.010842181032931438, 0.034170718530524044, 0.02058533965810436, 0.06043980752799388]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5343680709534369, 0.5851966075558982, 0.6804733727810651, 0.6666666666666666]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.85 : [0.6216764385055904, 0.6251874829560949, 0.6232956094900464, 0.6324481865284974]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.85 : [array([0.37302387, 0.37302387, 0.5259797 , ..., 0.61480224, 0.37302387,
       0.37302387], dtype=float32), array([0.37731642, 0.37731642, 0.27030224, ..., 0.37731642, 0.92886144,
       0.37731642], dtype=float32), array([0.359433, 0.359433, 0.359433, ..., 0.359433, 0.359433, 0.359433],
      dtype=float32), array([0.3948009, 0.6287259, 0.3948009, ..., 0.3948009, 0.3948009,
       0.3948009], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.85 : [0.12450402557879735, 0.1565036110490656, 0.1473651843025714, 0.1810139756170086]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5289808802523773, 0.5398936315471634, 0.5753857123847841, 0.5775393468694332]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.85 : [0.4331278477619941, 0.45204301075268816, 0.5222010351402887, 0.5217484465395329]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.85 : [0.07270109771459421, 0.09463353142445526, 0.08578716548823055, 0.10950218104960202]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.85 : [0.6126431688028361, 0.6138191982547041, 0.6219150531769839, 0.6244545950368149]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.85 : [array([0.4020728 , 0.4020728 , 0.40726793, ..., 0.69840899, 0.4020728 ,
       0.4020728 ]), array([0.38028059, 0.38028059, 0.35395211, ..., 0.38028059, 0.35673611,
       0.38028059]), array([0.37437591, 0.37437591, 0.37437591, ..., 0.37437591, 0.37437591,
       0.37437591]), array([0.47129936, 0.65840953, 0.40281517, ..., 0.40281517, 0.40281517,
       0.40281517])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.85 : [0.08874671916010499, 0.15673550406535097, 0.14399190094229422, 0.21963898916967514]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5096037361533944, 0.5197189695191768, 0.5209046238449743, 0.5351759655374667]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5018552875695733, 0.5151819322459222, 0.5542565947242206, 0.556836902800659]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.85 : [0.04867734389058845, 0.09242751665766252, 0.08274411527790208, 0.13679902864595045]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.85 : [0.621284428688301, 0.6234830924461413, 0.6253067902917917, 0.631578947368421]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.07
Logistic F1-score 21.808174346387
Logistic ROCAUC score: 54.2697245047042
Logistic Recall score: 13.16332944239921
Logistic Precision Score: 63.531960996749724
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[34715  1683]
 [19342  2932]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.95      0.77     36398
           1       0.64      0.13      0.22     22274

    accuracy                           0.64     58672
   macro avg       0.64      0.54      0.49     58672
weighted avg       0.64      0.64      0.56     58672


Logistic Accuracy Score 64.16518952822472
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.1964738368988037 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.07
DCT F1-score 25.95050096211267
DCT ROCAUC score: 53.3435560170354
DCT Recall score: 17.558588488821048
DCT Precision Score: 49.70767666497204
DCT Confusion Matrix [[32441  3957]
 [18363  3911]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.89      0.74     36398
           1       0.50      0.18      0.26     22274

    accuracy                           0.62     58672
   macro avg       0.57      0.53      0.50     58672
weighted avg       0.58      0.62      0.56     58672


DCT Accuracy Score 61.95800381783474
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  1.0581676959991455 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.07
Naive F1-score 12.3555266156601
Naive ROCAUC score: 52.336072939939505
Naive Recall score: 6.815120768609141
Naive Precision Score: 66.0574412532637
Naive Confusion Matrix [[35618   780]
 [20756  1518]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.98      0.77     36398
           1       0.66      0.07      0.12     22274

    accuracy                           0.63     58672
   macro avg       0.65      0.52      0.45     58672
weighted avg       0.64      0.63      0.52     58672


Naive Accuracy Score 63.2942459776384
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.06386017799377441 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.07
XGB F1-Score 20.448804773584214
XGB ROCAUC Score: 59.52910232216628
XGB Recall score: 55.3837001784652
XGB Precision Score: 12.539283469516027
XGB Confusion Matrix [[34148 19481]
 [ 2250  2793]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.94      0.64      0.76     53629
           1       0.13      0.55      0.20      5043

    accuracy                           0.63     58672
   macro avg       0.53      0.60      0.48     58672
weighted avg       0.87      0.63      0.71     58672


XGB Accuracy Score 63.2942459776384
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  0.6871631145477295 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.07
RFC F1 score 24.71941540505577
RFC ROCAUC Score: 54.09988527215132
RFC Recall score: 55.87166113481903
RFC Precision Score: 15.870521684475172
RFC Confusion Matrix [[33606  2792]
 [18739  3535]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.64      0.92      0.76     36398
           1       0.56      0.16      0.25     22274

    accuracy                           0.63     58672
   macro avg       0.60      0.54      0.50     58672
weighted avg       0.61      0.63      0.56     58672


RFC Accuracy Score 63.30276793018817
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  453.21806597709656 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.85 : [array([0.37505582, 0.37505582, 0.41795115, ..., 0.46990733, 0.37505582,
       0.37505582]), array([0.37603933, 0.37603933, 0.45033936, ..., 0.37603933, 0.42891015,
       0.37603933]), array([0.35732138, 0.35732138, 0.35732138, ..., 0.35732138, 0.35732138,
       0.35732138]), array([0.40022647, 0.39940225, 0.39440279, ..., 0.39440279, 0.39440279,
       0.39440279]), array([0.41195011, 0.38959148, 0.29060509, ..., 0.38959148, 0.18814254,
       0.48263611])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.85 : [0.012959921885402336, 0.0859981631460299, 0.06566604127579738, 0.16052984309705903, 0.21808174346387]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5011301564392072, 0.5134215403375185, 0.5126042476248786, 0.5307802427482884, 0.542697245047042]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.85 : [0.006568292244016556, 0.0463713308121736, 0.03445806855813121, 0.09155911318972883, 0.1316332944239921]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.85 : [0.48184818481848185, 0.5912743972445464, 0.6962025316455697, 0.6506871204857783, 0.6353196099674973]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.85 : [0.6209605944914098, 0.6268407417507499, 0.6265339514589583, 0.6370670848104718, 0.6416518952822471]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.85 : [array([0.4015748, 0.4015748, 0.       , ..., 1.       , 0.4015748,
       0.4015748]), array([0.38018742, 0.38018742, 1.        , ..., 0.38018742, 1.        ,
       0.38018742]), array([0.37421665, 0.37421665, 0.37421665, ..., 0.37421665, 0.37421665,
       0.37421665]), array([0.40274117, 1.        , 0.40274117, ..., 0.40274117, 0.40274117,
       0.40274117]), array([0.        , 0.40189394, 0.        , ..., 0.40189394, 0.        ,
       0.        ])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.85 : [0.1479859564347465, 0.19232661091982292, 0.19405840522687073, 0.2368161907025705, 0.2595050096211267]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5125195544318174, 0.5134347576078084, 0.5234082198327753, 0.5272869303543444, 0.533435560170354]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.85 : [0.0881770739607702, 0.1232216819737079, 0.12028998478474895, 0.15681072087062103, 0.17558588488821048]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.85 : [0.4599859187984041, 0.43792, 0.5017733806234833, 0.4834997226844149, 0.4970767666497204]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.85 : [0.6153361058085629, 0.6081947095718571, 0.6194607308426506, 0.6169382328879193, 0.6195800381783474]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.85 : [array([0.37595908, 0.37932546, 0.37850725, ..., 0.46623632, 0.37595908,
       0.37790202]), array([0.38107417, 0.38496768, 0.37036953, ..., 0.38107417, 0.33077551,
       0.38107417]), array([0.35763001, 0.35763001, 0.35763001, ..., 0.35763001, 0.35763001,
       0.35763001]), array([0.41002373, 0.28782858, 0.39503963, ..., 0.4044755 , 0.39503963,
       0.4044755 ]), array([0.35982148, 0.39116143, 0.26915169, ..., 0.40366164, 0.15611819,
       0.47894858])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.85 : [0.021253141672913266, 0.06457101535582117, 0.039961775692815574, 0.11083164969282151, 0.123555266156601]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5025399578197255, 0.5097074108286191, 0.5073195926942177, 0.5209980017467059, 0.523360729399395]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.85 : [0.010842181032931438, 0.034170718530524044, 0.02058533965810436, 0.06043980752799388, 0.06815120768609141]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5343680709534369, 0.5851966075558982, 0.6804733727810651, 0.6666666666666666, 0.660574412532637]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.85 : [0.6216764385055904, 0.6251874829560949, 0.6232956094900464, 0.6324481865284974, 0.632942459776384]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.85 : [array([0.37302387, 0.37302387, 0.5259797 , ..., 0.61480224, 0.37302387,
       0.37302387], dtype=float32), array([0.37731642, 0.37731642, 0.27030224, ..., 0.37731642, 0.92886144,
       0.37731642], dtype=float32), array([0.359433, 0.359433, 0.359433, ..., 0.359433, 0.359433, 0.359433],
      dtype=float32), array([0.3948009, 0.6287259, 0.3948009, ..., 0.3948009, 0.3948009,
       0.3948009], dtype=float32), array([0.19627735, 0.39072517, 0.27459532, ..., 0.39072517, 0.04376426,
       0.33783162], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.85 : [0.12450402557879735, 0.1565036110490656, 0.1473651843025714, 0.1810139756170086, 0.20448804773584214]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5289808802523773, 0.5398936315471634, 0.5753857123847841, 0.5775393468694332, 0.5952910232216628]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.85 : [0.4331278477619941, 0.45204301075268816, 0.5222010351402887, 0.5217484465395329, 0.553837001784652]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.85 : [0.07270109771459421, 0.09463353142445526, 0.08578716548823055, 0.10950218104960202, 0.12539283469516027]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.85 : [0.6126431688028361, 0.6138191982547041, 0.6219150531769839, 0.6244545950368149, 0.6296188982819744]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.85 : [array([0.4020728 , 0.4020728 , 0.40726793, ..., 0.69840899, 0.4020728 ,
       0.4020728 ]), array([0.38028059, 0.38028059, 0.35395211, ..., 0.38028059, 0.35673611,
       0.38028059]), array([0.37437591, 0.37437591, 0.37437591, ..., 0.37437591, 0.37437591,
       0.37437591]), array([0.47129936, 0.65840953, 0.40281517, ..., 0.40281517, 0.40281517,
       0.40281517]), array([0.38844266, 0.40229317, 0.09422506, ..., 0.40229317, 0.155     ,
       0.32768137])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.85 : [0.08874671916010499, 0.15673550406535097, 0.14399190094229422, 0.21963898916967514, 0.2471941540505577]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5096037361533944, 0.5197189695191768, 0.5209046238449743, 0.5351759655374667, 0.5409988527215132]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.85 : [0.5018552875695733, 0.5151819322459222, 0.5542565947242206, 0.556836902800659, 0.5587166113481903]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.85 : [0.04867734389058845, 0.09242751665766252, 0.08274411527790208, 0.13679902864595045, 0.15870521684475172]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.85 : [0.621284428688301, 0.6234830924461413, 0.6253067902917917, 0.631578947368421, 0.6330276793018816]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.005
Logistic F1-score 0.7869866142008923
Logistic ROCAUC score: 50.10583090020296
Logistic Recall score: 0.396235760277365
Logistic Precision Score: 56.852791878172596
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[45967    85]
 [28154   112]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.62      1.00      0.77     46052
           1       0.57      0.00      0.01     28266

    accuracy                           0.62     74318
   macro avg       0.59      0.50      0.39     74318
weighted avg       0.60      0.62      0.48     74318


Logistic Accuracy Score 62.00247584703571
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.17050552368164062 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.005
DCT F1-score 9.761189308872371
DCT ROCAUC score: 50.76860068949895
DCT Recall score: 5.458855161678342
DCT Precision Score: 46.073454762615704
DCT Confusion Matrix [[44246  1806]
 [26723  1543]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.62      0.96      0.76     46052
           1       0.46      0.05      0.10     28266

    accuracy                           0.62     74318
   macro avg       0.54      0.51      0.43     74318
weighted avg       0.56      0.62      0.51     74318


DCT Accuracy Score 61.612260825102936
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  0.1715083122253418 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.005
Naive F1-score 2.356447309145095
Naive ROCAUC score: 50.32891125588811
Naive Recall score: 1.2028585579848583
Naive Precision Score: 57.52961082910322
Naive Confusion Matrix [[45801   251]
 [27926   340]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.62      0.99      0.76     46052
           1       0.58      0.01      0.02     28266

    accuracy                           0.62     74318
   macro avg       0.60      0.50      0.39     74318
weighted avg       0.60      0.62      0.48     74318


Naive Accuracy Score 62.08590112758685
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.0847938060760498 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.005
XGB F1-Score 8.686105460299007
XGB ROCAUC Score: 56.08411985524293
XGB Recall score: 49.75952645209027
XGB Precision Score: 4.758366942616571
XGB Confusion Matrix [[44694 26921]
 [ 1358  1345]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.97      0.62      0.76     71615
           1       0.05      0.50      0.09      2703

    accuracy                           0.62     74318
   macro avg       0.51      0.56      0.42     74318
weighted avg       0.94      0.62      0.74     74318


XGB Accuracy Score 62.08590112758685
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  0.4946761131286621 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.005
RFC F1 score 7.527723418134377
RFC ROCAUC Score: 50.6950175514002
RFC Recall score: 48.20384294068504
RFC Precision Score: 4.082643458572136
RFC Confusion Matrix [[44812  1240]
 [27112  1154]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.62      0.97      0.76     46052
           1       0.48      0.04      0.08     28266

    accuracy                           0.62     74318
   macro avg       0.55      0.51      0.42     74318
weighted avg       0.57      0.62      0.50     74318


RFC Accuracy Score 61.85042654538604
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  48.567004919052124 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.95 : [array([0.38029711, 0.38029711, 0.38029711, ..., 0.29999875, 0.38029711,
       0.38029711])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.95 : [0.007869866142008923]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.95 : [0.5010583090020296]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.95 : [0.00396235760277365]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.95 : [0.5685279187817259]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.95 : [0.6200247584703571]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.95 : [array([0.42180095, 0.42180095, 0.42180095, ..., 0.        , 0.42180095,
       0.42180095])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.95 : [0.09761189308872371]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.95 : [0.5076860068949895]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.95 : [0.054588551616783415]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.95 : [0.46073454762615706]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.95 : [0.6161226082510294]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.95 : [array([0.37084399, 0.37084399, 0.37084399, ..., 0.20633435, 0.37226166,
       0.37084399])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.95 : [0.02356447309145095]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.95 : [0.5032891125588811]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.95 : [0.012028585579848582]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.95 : [0.5752961082910322]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.95 : [0.6208590112758685]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.95 : [array([0.38872465, 0.38872465, 0.38872465, ..., 0.33626467, 0.38872465,
       0.38872465], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.95 : [0.08686105460299008]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.95 : [0.5608411985524293]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.95 : [0.4975952645209027]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.95 : [0.04758366942616571]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.95 : [0.6194865308538982]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.95 : [array([0.42201634, 0.42201634, 0.42201634, ..., 0.17249944, 0.42201634,
       0.42201634])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.95 : [0.07527723418134377]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.95 : [0.506950175514002]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.95 : [0.48203842940685043]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.95 : [0.04082643458572136]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.95 : [0.6185042654538604]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.01
Logistic F1-score 2.2690437601296596
Logistic ROCAUC score: 50.152839176034135
Logistic Recall score: 1.1635720601237842
Logistic Precision Score: 45.44198895027624
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[45648   395]
 [27946   329]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.62      0.99      0.76     46043
           1       0.45      0.01      0.02     28275

    accuracy                           0.62     74318
   macro avg       0.54      0.50      0.39     74318
weighted avg       0.56      0.62      0.48     74318


Logistic Accuracy Score 61.86522780483866
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.18049097061157227 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.01
DCT F1-score 15.67704246228965
DCT ROCAUC score: 51.039022051293195
DCT Recall score: 9.538461538461538
DCT Precision Score: 43.98238747553816
DCT Confusion Matrix [[42608  3435]
 [25578  2697]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.62      0.93      0.75     46043
           1       0.44      0.10      0.16     28275

    accuracy                           0.61     74318
   macro avg       0.53      0.51      0.45     74318
weighted avg       0.55      0.61      0.52     74318


DCT Accuracy Score 60.96100540918754
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  0.2543206214904785 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.01
Naive F1-score 4.031491787701914
Naive ROCAUC score: 50.39991897782554
Naive Recall score: 2.1007957559681696
Naive Precision Score: 49.79044425817267
Naive Confusion Matrix [[45444   599]
 [27681   594]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.62      0.99      0.76     46043
           1       0.50      0.02      0.04     28275

    accuracy                           0.62     74318
   macro avg       0.56      0.50      0.40     74318
weighted avg       0.57      0.62      0.49     74318


Naive Accuracy Score 61.94730751634866
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.08578634262084961 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.01
XGB F1-Score 9.675508868177426
XGB ROCAUC Score: 51.439602831138195
XGB Recall score: 40.777719390436154
XGB Precision Score: 5.48894783377542
XGB Confusion Matrix [[43789 26723]
 [ 2254  1552]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.62      0.75     70512
           1       0.05      0.41      0.10      3806

    accuracy                           0.61     74318
   macro avg       0.50      0.51      0.42     74318
weighted avg       0.91      0.61      0.72     74318


XGB Accuracy Score 61.94730751634866
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  0.577458381652832 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.01
RFC F1 score 8.805883491387654
RFC ROCAUC Score: 50.93474091310447
RFC Recall score: 50.05500550055005
RFC Precision Score: 4.827586206896552
RFC Confusion Matrix [[44681  1362]
 [26910  1365]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.62      0.97      0.76     46043
           1       0.50      0.05      0.09     28275

    accuracy                           0.62     74318
   macro avg       0.56      0.51      0.42     74318
weighted avg       0.58      0.62      0.50     74318


RFC Accuracy Score 61.958072068677836
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  86.53553628921509 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.95 : [array([0.38029711, 0.38029711, 0.38029711, ..., 0.29999875, 0.38029711,
       0.38029711]), array([0.38564645, 0.31003321, 0.34847438, ..., 0.39321932, 0.34156693,
       0.34847438])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.95 : [0.007869866142008923, 0.022690437601296597]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.95 : [0.5010583090020296, 0.5015283917603414]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.95 : [0.00396235760277365, 0.011635720601237843]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.95 : [0.5685279187817259, 0.4544198895027624]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.95 : [0.6200247584703571, 0.6186522780483866]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.95 : [array([0.42180095, 0.42180095, 0.42180095, ..., 0.        , 0.42180095,
       0.42180095]), array([0.        , 0.        , 0.35734072, ..., 0.35734072, 1.        ,
       0.35734072])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.95 : [0.09761189308872371, 0.1567704246228965]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.95 : [0.5076860068949895, 0.5103902205129319]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.95 : [0.054588551616783415, 0.09538461538461539]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.95 : [0.46073454762615706, 0.4398238747553816]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.95 : [0.6161226082510294, 0.6096100540918754]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.95 : [array([0.37084399, 0.37084399, 0.37084399, ..., 0.20633435, 0.37226166,
       0.37084399]), array([0.34192608, 0.1700764 , 0.34910486, ..., 0.42835725, 0.23820015,
       0.34910486])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.95 : [0.02356447309145095, 0.040314917877019144]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.95 : [0.5032891125588811, 0.5039991897782554]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.95 : [0.012028585579848582, 0.021007957559681698]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.95 : [0.5752961082910322, 0.4979044425817267]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.95 : [0.6208590112758685, 0.6194730751634866]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.95 : [array([0.38872465, 0.38872465, 0.38872465, ..., 0.33626467, 0.38872465,
       0.38872465], dtype=float32), array([0.9147555 , 0.07663587, 0.3502948 , ..., 0.3502948 , 0.3338184 ,
       0.3502948 ], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.95 : [0.08686105460299008, 0.09675508868177425]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.95 : [0.5608411985524293, 0.514396028311382]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.95 : [0.4975952645209027, 0.4077771939043615]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.95 : [0.04758366942616571, 0.0548894783377542]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.95 : [0.6194865308538982, 0.6100944589466886]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.95 : [array([0.42201634, 0.42201634, 0.42201634, ..., 0.17249944, 0.42201634,
       0.42201634]), array([0.3760332 , 0.2344332 , 0.35663467, ..., 0.37517526, 0.44249853,
       0.35663467])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.95 : [0.07527723418134377, 0.08805883491387653]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.95 : [0.506950175514002, 0.5093474091310447]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.95 : [0.48203842940685043, 0.5005500550055005]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.95 : [0.04082643458572136, 0.04827586206896552]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.95 : [0.6185042654538604, 0.6195807206867784]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.015
Logistic F1-score 3.309871244635193
Logistic ROCAUC score: 50.423416509428435
Logistic Recall score: 1.7063758983254858
Logistic Precision Score: 54.89749430523918
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[45675   396]
 [27765   482]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.62      0.99      0.76     46071
           1       0.55      0.02      0.03     28247

    accuracy                           0.62     74318
   macro avg       0.59      0.50      0.40     74318
weighted avg       0.59      0.62      0.49     74318


Logistic Accuracy Score 62.10743023224522
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.1795189380645752 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.015
DCT F1-score 17.37900782084211
DCT ROCAUC score: 51.64740969714231
DCT Recall score: 10.659539066095515
DCT Precision Score: 47.01748906933167
DCT Confusion Matrix [[42678  3393]
 [25236  3011]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.93      0.75     46071
           1       0.47      0.11      0.17     28247

    accuracy                           0.61     74318
   macro avg       0.55      0.52      0.46     74318
weighted avg       0.57      0.61      0.53     74318


DCT Accuracy Score 61.47770392098818
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  0.3361186981201172 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.015
Naive F1-score 4.168230037179794
Naive ROCAUC score: 50.58338661324699
Naive Recall score: 2.1630615640599005
Naive Precision Score: 57.10280373831775
Naive Confusion Matrix [[45612   459]
 [27636   611]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.62      0.99      0.76     46071
           1       0.57      0.02      0.04     28247

    accuracy                           0.62     74318
   macro avg       0.60      0.51      0.40     74318
weighted avg       0.60      0.62      0.49     74318


Naive Accuracy Score 62.19623778896095
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.08080363273620605 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.015
XGB F1-Score 14.407814407814406
XGB ROCAUC Score: 53.96405571183769
XGB Recall score: 45.3675918979745
XGB Precision Score: 8.563741282260064
XGB Confusion Matrix [[43158 25828]
 [ 2913  2419]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.94      0.63      0.75     68986
           1       0.09      0.45      0.14      5332

    accuracy                           0.61     74318
   macro avg       0.51      0.54      0.45     74318
weighted avg       0.88      0.61      0.71     74318


XGB Accuracy Score 62.19623778896095
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  0.5734376907348633 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.015
RFC F1 score 12.69473090304987
RFC ROCAUC Score: 51.81435746080088
RFC Recall score: 55.38840262582057
RFC Precision Score: 7.168902892342549
RFC Confusion Matrix [[44440  1631]
 [26222  2025]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.96      0.76     46071
           1       0.55      0.07      0.13     28247

    accuracy                           0.63     74318
   macro avg       0.59      0.52      0.44     74318
weighted avg       0.60      0.63      0.52     74318


RFC Accuracy Score 62.52186549691865
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  122.65770125389099 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.95 : [array([0.38029711, 0.38029711, 0.38029711, ..., 0.29999875, 0.38029711,
       0.38029711]), array([0.38564645, 0.31003321, 0.34847438, ..., 0.39321932, 0.34156693,
       0.34847438]), array([0.36305442, 0.37108799, 0.33230062, ..., 0.37108799, 0.37108799,
       0.37108799])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.95 : [0.007869866142008923, 0.022690437601296597, 0.03309871244635193]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.95 : [0.5010583090020296, 0.5015283917603414, 0.5042341650942843]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.95 : [0.00396235760277365, 0.011635720601237843, 0.017063758983254858]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.95 : [0.5685279187817259, 0.4544198895027624, 0.5489749430523918]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.95 : [0.6200247584703571, 0.6186522780483866, 0.6210743023224522]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.95 : [array([0.42180095, 0.42180095, 0.42180095, ..., 0.        , 0.42180095,
       0.42180095]), array([0.        , 0.        , 0.35734072, ..., 0.35734072, 1.        ,
       0.35734072]), array([0.38392857, 0.38392857, 0.        , ..., 0.38392857, 0.38392857,
       0.38392857])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.95 : [0.09761189308872371, 0.1567704246228965, 0.1737900782084211]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.95 : [0.5076860068949895, 0.5103902205129319, 0.5164740969714231]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.95 : [0.054588551616783415, 0.09538461538461539, 0.10659539066095515]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.95 : [0.46073454762615706, 0.4398238747553816, 0.4701748906933167]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.95 : [0.6161226082510294, 0.6096100540918754, 0.6147770392098818]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.95 : [array([0.37084399, 0.37084399, 0.37084399, ..., 0.20633435, 0.37226166,
       0.37084399]), array([0.34192608, 0.1700764 , 0.34910486, ..., 0.42835725, 0.23820015,
       0.34910486]), array([0.35618652, 0.3716965 , 0.2407022 , ..., 0.3716965 , 0.37479274,
       0.3716965 ])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.95 : [0.02356447309145095, 0.040314917877019144, 0.04168230037179794]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.95 : [0.5032891125588811, 0.5039991897782554, 0.5058338661324698]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.95 : [0.012028585579848582, 0.021007957559681698, 0.021630615640599003]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.95 : [0.5752961082910322, 0.4979044425817267, 0.5710280373831775]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.95 : [0.6208590112758685, 0.6194730751634866, 0.6219623778896095]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.95 : [array([0.38872465, 0.38872465, 0.38872465, ..., 0.33626467, 0.38872465,
       0.38872465], dtype=float32), array([0.9147555 , 0.07663587, 0.3502948 , ..., 0.3502948 , 0.3338184 ,
       0.3502948 ], dtype=float32), array([0.36923537, 0.36923537, 0.36887148, ..., 0.36923537, 0.36923537,
       0.36923537], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.95 : [0.08686105460299008, 0.09675508868177425, 0.14407814407814407]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.95 : [0.5608411985524293, 0.514396028311382, 0.5396405571183769]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.95 : [0.4975952645209027, 0.4077771939043615, 0.45367591897974496]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.95 : [0.04758366942616571, 0.0548894783377542, 0.08563741282260064]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.95 : [0.6194865308538982, 0.6100944589466886, 0.6132700018837967]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.95 : [array([0.42201634, 0.42201634, 0.42201634, ..., 0.17249944, 0.42201634,
       0.42201634]), array([0.3760332 , 0.2344332 , 0.35663467, ..., 0.37517526, 0.44249853,
       0.35663467]), array([0.3541991 , 0.38371537, 0.31746964, ..., 0.38371537, 0.38371537,
       0.38371537])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.95 : [0.07527723418134377, 0.08805883491387653, 0.1269473090304987]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.95 : [0.506950175514002, 0.5093474091310447, 0.5181435746080088]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.95 : [0.48203842940685043, 0.5005500550055005, 0.5538840262582057]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.95 : [0.04082643458572136, 0.04827586206896552, 0.07168902892342549]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.95 : [0.6185042654538604, 0.6195807206867784, 0.6252186549691865]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.02
Logistic F1-score 10.595088667889673
Logistic ROCAUC score: 51.57795484387104
Logistic Recall score: 5.839571433639621
Logistic Precision Score: 57.07350901525658
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[44893  1238]
 [26541  1646]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.97      0.76     46131
           1       0.57      0.06      0.11     28187

    accuracy                           0.63     74318
   macro avg       0.60      0.52      0.43     74318
weighted avg       0.61      0.63      0.51     74318


Logistic Accuracy Score 62.62143760596356
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.34306788444519043 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.02
DCT F1-score 20.238462617477907
DCT ROCAUC score: 52.224356871980206
DCT Recall score: 12.796679320254018
DCT Precision Score: 48.36417270045589
DCT Confusion Matrix [[42280  3851]
 [24580  3607]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.92      0.75     46131
           1       0.48      0.13      0.20     28187

    accuracy                           0.62     74318
   macro avg       0.56      0.52      0.48     74318
weighted avg       0.58      0.62      0.54     74318


DCT Accuracy Score 61.7441265911354
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  0.3918931484222412 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.02
Naive F1-score 7.8770857426069725
Naive ROCAUC score: 51.154141237590736
Naive Recall score: 4.228899847447405
Naive Precision Score: 57.36284889316651
Naive Confusion Matrix [[45245   886]
 [26995  1192]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.98      0.76     46131
           1       0.57      0.04      0.08     28187

    accuracy                           0.62     74318
   macro avg       0.60      0.51      0.42     74318
weighted avg       0.61      0.62      0.50     74318


Naive Accuracy Score 62.48418956376651
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.08377695083618164 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.02
XGB F1-Score 15.619352353864842
XGB ROCAUC Score: 55.09747768563265
XGB Recall score: 47.35896514552641
XGB Precision Score: 9.35182885727463
XGB Confusion Matrix [[43201 25551]
 [ 2930  2636]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.94      0.63      0.75     68752
           1       0.09      0.47      0.16      5566

    accuracy                           0.62     74318
   macro avg       0.52      0.55      0.45     74318
weighted avg       0.87      0.62      0.71     74318


XGB Accuracy Score 62.48418956376651
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  0.5834400653839111 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.02
RFC F1 score 16.57822945708547
RFC ROCAUC Score: 52.29803633476424
RFC Recall score: 53.481624758220505
RFC Precision Score: 9.809486642778587
RFC Confusion Matrix [[43726  2405]
 [25422  2765]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.95      0.76     46131
           1       0.53      0.10      0.17     28187

    accuracy                           0.63     74318
   macro avg       0.58      0.52      0.46     74318
weighted avg       0.60      0.63      0.53     74318


RFC Accuracy Score 62.55685029198849
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  152.47694087028503 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.95 : [array([0.38029711, 0.38029711, 0.38029711, ..., 0.29999875, 0.38029711,
       0.38029711]), array([0.38564645, 0.31003321, 0.34847438, ..., 0.39321932, 0.34156693,
       0.34847438]), array([0.36305442, 0.37108799, 0.33230062, ..., 0.37108799, 0.37108799,
       0.37108799]), array([0.4300211 , 0.40160668, 0.3601075 , ..., 0.40160668, 0.30479925,
       0.40160668])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.95 : [0.007869866142008923, 0.022690437601296597, 0.03309871244635193, 0.10595088667889672]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.95 : [0.5010583090020296, 0.5015283917603414, 0.5042341650942843, 0.5157795484387104]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.95 : [0.00396235760277365, 0.011635720601237843, 0.017063758983254858, 0.05839571433639621]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.95 : [0.5685279187817259, 0.4544198895027624, 0.5489749430523918, 0.5707350901525658]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.95 : [0.6200247584703571, 0.6186522780483866, 0.6210743023224522, 0.6262143760596356]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.95 : [array([0.42180095, 0.42180095, 0.42180095, ..., 0.        , 0.42180095,
       0.42180095]), array([0.        , 0.        , 0.35734072, ..., 0.35734072, 1.        ,
       0.35734072]), array([0.38392857, 0.38392857, 0.        , ..., 0.38392857, 0.38392857,
       0.38392857]), array([0.41939547, 0.41939547, 0.        , ..., 0.41939547, 0.        ,
       0.41939547])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.95 : [0.09761189308872371, 0.1567704246228965, 0.1737900782084211, 0.20238462617477906]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.95 : [0.5076860068949895, 0.5103902205129319, 0.5164740969714231, 0.522243568719802]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.95 : [0.054588551616783415, 0.09538461538461539, 0.10659539066095515, 0.12796679320254017]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.95 : [0.46073454762615706, 0.4398238747553816, 0.4701748906933167, 0.4836417270045589]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.95 : [0.6161226082510294, 0.6096100540918754, 0.6147770392098818, 0.617441265911354]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.95 : [array([0.37084399, 0.37084399, 0.37084399, ..., 0.20633435, 0.37226166,
       0.37084399]), array([0.34192608, 0.1700764 , 0.34910486, ..., 0.42835725, 0.23820015,
       0.34910486]), array([0.35618652, 0.3716965 , 0.2407022 , ..., 0.3716965 , 0.37479274,
       0.3716965 ]), array([0.24508031, 0.39705882, 0.2742745 , ..., 0.39705882, 0.19611394,
       0.40105156])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.95 : [0.02356447309145095, 0.040314917877019144, 0.04168230037179794, 0.07877085742606972]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.95 : [0.5032891125588811, 0.5039991897782554, 0.5058338661324698, 0.5115414123759073]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.95 : [0.012028585579848582, 0.021007957559681698, 0.021630615640599003, 0.04228899847447405]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.95 : [0.5752961082910322, 0.4979044425817267, 0.5710280373831775, 0.5736284889316651]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.95 : [0.6208590112758685, 0.6194730751634866, 0.6219623778896095, 0.6248418956376651]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.95 : [array([0.38872465, 0.38872465, 0.38872465, ..., 0.33626467, 0.38872465,
       0.38872465], dtype=float32), array([0.9147555 , 0.07663587, 0.3502948 , ..., 0.3502948 , 0.3338184 ,
       0.3502948 ], dtype=float32), array([0.36923537, 0.36923537, 0.36887148, ..., 0.36923537, 0.36923537,
       0.36923537], dtype=float32), array([0.91611284, 0.40405288, 0.6507321 , ..., 0.40405288, 0.3274813 ,
       0.40405288], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.95 : [0.08686105460299008, 0.09675508868177425, 0.14407814407814407, 0.15619352353864843]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.95 : [0.5608411985524293, 0.514396028311382, 0.5396405571183769, 0.5509747768563265]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.95 : [0.4975952645209027, 0.4077771939043615, 0.45367591897974496, 0.4735896514552641]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.95 : [0.04758366942616571, 0.0548894783377542, 0.08563741282260064, 0.0935182885727463]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.95 : [0.6194865308538982, 0.6100944589466886, 0.6132700018837967, 0.6167684813907801]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.95 : [array([0.42201634, 0.42201634, 0.42201634, ..., 0.17249944, 0.42201634,
       0.42201634]), array([0.3760332 , 0.2344332 , 0.35663467, ..., 0.37517526, 0.44249853,
       0.35663467]), array([0.3541991 , 0.38371537, 0.31746964, ..., 0.38371537, 0.38371537,
       0.38371537]), array([0.35915571, 0.41898731, 0.33620331, ..., 0.41898731, 0.19967906,
       0.41898731])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.95 : [0.07527723418134377, 0.08805883491387653, 0.1269473090304987, 0.1657822945708547]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.95 : [0.506950175514002, 0.5093474091310447, 0.5181435746080088, 0.5229803633476424]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.95 : [0.48203842940685043, 0.5005500550055005, 0.5538840262582057, 0.534816247582205]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.95 : [0.04082643458572136, 0.04827586206896552, 0.07168902892342549, 0.09809486642778587]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.95 : [0.6185042654538604, 0.6195807206867784, 0.6252186549691865, 0.6255685029198849]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.025
Logistic F1-score 7.757189347147507
Logistic ROCAUC score: 51.29493082296265
Logistic Recall score: 4.1370027981440165
Logistic Precision Score: 62.09463051568315
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[45372   713]
 [27065  1168]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.98      0.77     46085
           1       0.62      0.04      0.08     28233

    accuracy                           0.63     74318
   macro avg       0.62      0.51      0.42     74318
weighted avg       0.62      0.63      0.50     74318


Logistic Accuracy Score 62.62278317500471
Execution Time for Logistic Regression Imbalanced:  0.21239781379699707 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.025
DCT F1-score 20.3050790635302
DCT ROCAUC score: 52.17512583343673
DCT Recall score: 12.871462472992597
DCT Precision Score: 48.062425605078694
DCT Confusion Matrix [[42158  3927]
 [24599  3634]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.91      0.75     46085
           1       0.48      0.13      0.20     28233

    accuracy                           0.62     74318
   macro avg       0.56      0.52      0.48     74318
weighted avg       0.57      0.62      0.54     74318


DCT Accuracy Score 61.61629753222638
Execution Time for Decision Tree Imbalanced:  0.5045702457427979 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.025
Naive F1-score 5.68185656859102
Naive ROCAUC score: 50.9154523867268
Naive Recall score: 2.97878369284171
Naive Precision Score: 61.386861313868614
Naive Confusion Matrix [[45556   529]
 [27392   841]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.62      0.99      0.77     46085
           1       0.61      0.03      0.06     28233

    accuracy                           0.62     74318
   macro avg       0.62      0.51      0.41     74318
weighted avg       0.62      0.62      0.50     74318


Naive Accuracy Score 62.430366802120616
Execution Time for Naive Bayes Imbalanced:  0.08577466011047363 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer Imbalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.025
XGB F1-Score 14.06467210637655
XGB ROCAUC Score: 55.307241980195066
XGB Recall score: 47.91023265390159
XGB Precision Score: 8.24212800623384
XGB Confusion Matrix [[43555 25906]
 [ 2530  2327]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.63      0.75     69461
           1       0.08      0.48      0.14      4857

    accuracy                           0.62     74318
   macro avg       0.51      0.55      0.45     74318
weighted avg       0.89      0.62      0.71     74318


XGB Accuracy Score 62.430366802120616
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier Imbalanced:  0.5983633995056152 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf Imbalanced 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.025
RFC F1 score 15.696616951618768
RFC ROCAUC Score: 52.235054611369335
RFC Recall score: 54.44794952681388
RFC Precision Score: 9.17012007225587
RFC Confusion Matrix [[43919  2166]
 [25644  2589]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.63      0.95      0.76     46085
           1       0.54      0.09      0.16     28233

    accuracy                           0.63     74318
   macro avg       0.59      0.52      0.46     74318
weighted avg       0.60      0.63      0.53     74318


RFC Accuracy Score 62.57972496568799
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier Imbalanced:  189.11505246162415 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Imb: 0.95 : [array([0.38029711, 0.38029711, 0.38029711, ..., 0.29999875, 0.38029711,
       0.38029711]), array([0.38564645, 0.31003321, 0.34847438, ..., 0.39321932, 0.34156693,
       0.34847438]), array([0.36305442, 0.37108799, 0.33230062, ..., 0.37108799, 0.37108799,
       0.37108799]), array([0.4300211 , 0.40160668, 0.3601075 , ..., 0.40160668, 0.30479925,
       0.40160668]), array([0.40501042, 0.37373548, 0.32599546, ..., 0.37373548, 0.37373548,
       0.40995436])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Imb: 0.95 : [0.007869866142008923, 0.022690437601296597, 0.03309871244635193, 0.10595088667889672, 0.07757189347147507]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Imb: 0.95 : [0.5010583090020296, 0.5015283917603414, 0.5042341650942843, 0.5157795484387104, 0.5129493082296265]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Imb: 0.95 : [0.00396235760277365, 0.011635720601237843, 0.017063758983254858, 0.05839571433639621, 0.04137002798144016]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Imb: 0.95 : [0.5685279187817259, 0.4544198895027624, 0.5489749430523918, 0.5707350901525658, 0.6209463051568315]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Imb: 0.95 : [0.6200247584703571, 0.6186522780483866, 0.6210743023224522, 0.6262143760596356, 0.6262278317500471]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Imb: 0.95 : [array([0.42180095, 0.42180095, 0.42180095, ..., 0.        , 0.42180095,
       0.42180095]), array([0.        , 0.        , 0.35734072, ..., 0.35734072, 1.        ,
       0.35734072]), array([0.38392857, 0.38392857, 0.        , ..., 0.38392857, 0.38392857,
       0.38392857]), array([0.41939547, 0.41939547, 0.        , ..., 0.41939547, 0.        ,
       0.41939547]), array([0.       , 0.3960084, 0.       , ..., 0.3960084, 0.3960084,
       0.3960084])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Imb: 0.95 : [0.09761189308872371, 0.1567704246228965, 0.1737900782084211, 0.20238462617477906, 0.20305079063530201]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Imb: 0.95 : [0.5076860068949895, 0.5103902205129319, 0.5164740969714231, 0.522243568719802, 0.5217512583343673]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Imb: 0.95 : [0.054588551616783415, 0.09538461538461539, 0.10659539066095515, 0.12796679320254017, 0.12871462472992598]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Imb: 0.95 : [0.46073454762615706, 0.4398238747553816, 0.4701748906933167, 0.4836417270045589, 0.48062425605078696]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Imb: 0.95 : [0.6161226082510294, 0.6096100540918754, 0.6147770392098818, 0.617441265911354, 0.6161629753222638]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Imb: 0.95 : [array([0.37084399, 0.37084399, 0.37084399, ..., 0.20633435, 0.37226166,
       0.37084399]), array([0.34192608, 0.1700764 , 0.34910486, ..., 0.42835725, 0.23820015,
       0.34910486]), array([0.35618652, 0.3716965 , 0.2407022 , ..., 0.3716965 , 0.37479274,
       0.3716965 ]), array([0.24508031, 0.39705882, 0.2742745 , ..., 0.39705882, 0.19611394,
       0.40105156]), array([0.35095542, 0.3713555 , 0.2762283 , ..., 0.37703996, 0.3713555 ,
       0.43035017])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Imb: 0.95 : [0.02356447309145095, 0.040314917877019144, 0.04168230037179794, 0.07877085742606972, 0.056818565685910205]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Imb: 0.95 : [0.5032891125588811, 0.5039991897782554, 0.5058338661324698, 0.5115414123759073, 0.509154523867268]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Imb: 0.95 : [0.012028585579848582, 0.021007957559681698, 0.021630615640599003, 0.04228899847447405, 0.0297878369284171]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Imb: 0.95 : [0.5752961082910322, 0.4979044425817267, 0.5710280373831775, 0.5736284889316651, 0.6138686131386861]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Imb: 0.95 : [0.6208590112758685, 0.6194730751634866, 0.6219623778896095, 0.6248418956376651, 0.6243036680212062]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Imb: 0.95 : [array([0.38872465, 0.38872465, 0.38872465, ..., 0.33626467, 0.38872465,
       0.38872465], dtype=float32), array([0.9147555 , 0.07663587, 0.3502948 , ..., 0.3502948 , 0.3338184 ,
       0.3502948 ], dtype=float32), array([0.36923537, 0.36923537, 0.36887148, ..., 0.36923537, 0.36923537,
       0.36923537], dtype=float32), array([0.91611284, 0.40405288, 0.6507321 , ..., 0.40405288, 0.3274813 ,
       0.40405288], dtype=float32), array([0.37473267, 0.37473267, 0.37473267, ..., 0.37473267, 0.37473267,
       0.37473267], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Imb: 0.95 : [0.08686105460299008, 0.09675508868177425, 0.14407814407814407, 0.15619352353864843, 0.1406467210637655]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Imb: 0.95 : [0.5608411985524293, 0.514396028311382, 0.5396405571183769, 0.5509747768563265, 0.5530724198019507]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Imb: 0.95 : [0.4975952645209027, 0.4077771939043615, 0.45367591897974496, 0.4735896514552641, 0.47910232653901585]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Imb: 0.95 : [0.04758366942616571, 0.0548894783377542, 0.08563741282260064, 0.0935182885727463, 0.0824212800623384]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Imb: 0.95 : [0.6194865308538982, 0.6100944589466886, 0.6132700018837967, 0.6167684813907801, 0.6173739874592965]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Imb: 0.95 : [array([0.42201634, 0.42201634, 0.42201634, ..., 0.17249944, 0.42201634,
       0.42201634]), array([0.3760332 , 0.2344332 , 0.35663467, ..., 0.37517526, 0.44249853,
       0.35663467]), array([0.3541991 , 0.38371537, 0.31746964, ..., 0.38371537, 0.38371537,
       0.38371537]), array([0.35915571, 0.41898731, 0.33620331, ..., 0.41898731, 0.19967906,
       0.41898731]), array([0.19867135, 0.39555491, 0.1534134 , ..., 0.39555491, 0.39555491,
       0.42288638])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Imb: 0.95 : [0.07527723418134377, 0.08805883491387653, 0.1269473090304987, 0.1657822945708547, 0.1569661695161877]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Imb: 0.95 : [0.506950175514002, 0.5093474091310447, 0.5181435746080088, 0.5229803633476424, 0.5223505461136934]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Imb: 0.95 : [0.48203842940685043, 0.5005500550055005, 0.5538840262582057, 0.534816247582205, 0.5444794952681388]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Imb: 0.95 : [0.04082643458572136, 0.04827586206896552, 0.07168902892342549, 0.09809486642778587, 0.0917012007225587]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Imb: 0.95 : [0.6185042654538604, 0.6195807206867784, 0.6252186549691865, 0.6255685029198849, 0.6257972496568799]
Array x-axis 1 [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
Array x-axis 2 [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
Array x-axis 3 [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
Array x-axis 4 [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
Array x-axis 5 [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
Array x-axis 6 [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
Array x-axis 7 [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
Array x-axis 8 [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
Array x-axis 9 [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
Array x-axis 10 [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
2022-07-29T12:18:52.274ZE [8524:NonCelloThread] thumbnail_util_win.cc:115:LoadBitmapFromPngResource Can't find PNG resource 0.
2022-07-29T12:18:52.275ZI [8524:NonCelloThread] ctxmenu.cc:213:GenerateContextMenu Received context menu with 0 menu items.
forrtl: error (200): program aborting due to control-C event
Image              PC                Routine            Line        Source
libifcoremd.dll    00007FFCD52B3B58  Unknown               Unknown  Unknown
KERNELBASE.dll     00007FFD58B8B853  Unknown               Unknown  Unknown
KERNEL32.DLL       00007FFD5AD27034  Unknown               Unknown  Unknown
ntdll.dll          00007FFD5AFE2651  Unknown               Unknown  Unknown
