
0.0641 Okapi06c 0.2596

0.1009 (+4.2%)
0.0601

SvvModel 0.1660

0.0669 SvvModel 0.2697

0.0624

3. COMBINING NOVELTY AND RELEVANCE

(+16.2%) (+4.4%)

(+3.9%) (+3.8%)

For retrieved documents, the document rankings should depend on which documents the user has already seen. Suppose that we have ranked top i - 1 documents, and now we need to decide which document should be ranked at the ith position in the ranking list. The document that can deliver the most new and relevant aspects should be considered as the ith document in the ranking list. Assume that aspect novelty and aspect query-relevance are independent of each other. Then given previous ranked i - 1 documents, we rank the ith document using the following scoring function:

score(di; d1, ..., di-1) = P (N ew and Rel|di)

=

P (N ew and Rel|aj )P (aj )

aj Adi



P (N ew|aj )P (aj |Rel)

(3)

aj Adi

where aj is an aspect detected from document di, which follows Poisson distribution with an estimated rate parameter. P (N ew and Rel|aj) denotes the probability that aj is query-relevant and can provide new information as well.
P (N ew|aj) in Equation 3 states the probability of obtaining new information from aspect aj, which can be calculated using the survival models proposed in Section 2. P (N ew|aj) = 1 when i = 1. Since we do not usually have relevance information, P (aj|Rel) is unavailable. One possible solution, as introduced in [7], is to consider that
the best bet is to relate the probability of aspect aj to the conditional probability of observing aj given the query: P (aj|Rel)  P (aj|Q). P (aj|Q) can be calculated by the two-stage model presented in [9].

4. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We conduct a series of experiments to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed model on the TREC 2006 and 2007 Genomics collections. For the 2007's topics, three baseline runs are used, which are NLMinter [3], MuMshFd [8] and an Okapi run [1]. NLMinter and MuMshFd were two of the most competitive IR runs submitted to the TREC 2007 Genomics track. For 2006's topics, we test our approach on three Okapi runs. In this paper, we mainly focus on the

Table 1: Re-ranking Performance on Genomics topics
5. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we propose a survival modeling approach to promoting ranking diversity for biomedical information retrieval. The probabilistic survival model derived from the survival analysis theory measures the probability that novel information can be provided by an aspect with respect to its occurrences. Experimental results show that the proposed survival model can successfully capture the novel information delivered by aspects and achieve significant improvements on ranking diversity. We also show that combining the novelty and the relevance of a retrieved document at the aspect level is an effective way of promoting diversity of the ranked list, while keeping the relevance of retrieved documents. The proposed approach not only achieves promising performance improvements on the diversity based evaluation measure, but also on the relevance based evaluation measure.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by NSERC Discovery Grant and an Early Researher Award of Ontario.
6. REFERENCES
[1] M. Beaulieu, M. Gatford, X. Huang, S. Robertson, S. Walker, and P. William. Okapi at TREC-5. In Proc. of TREC-5, 1997.
[2] D. Cox and D. Oakes. Analysis of Survival Data. Chapman Hall. [3] D. Demner-Fushman and et. al. Combining resources to find
answers to biomedical questions. In Proc. of TREC-16, 2007. [4] A. B. Goldberg and et. al. Ranking biomedical passages for
relevance and diversity: University of Wisconsin, Madison at TREC Genomics 2006. In Proc. of TREC-15, 2006. [5] W. Hersh, A. Cohen, P. Roberts, and H. Rekapalli. TREC 2006 Genomics track overview. In Proc. of TREC-15, 2006. [6] W. Hersh, A. Cohen, L. Ruslen, and P. Roberts. TREC 2007 Genomics track overview. In Proc. of TREC-16, 2007. [7] V. Lavrenko and W. B. Croft. Relevance based language models. In Proceeding of the 24th ACM SIGIR. [8] N. Stokes and et. al. Entity-based relevance feedback for genomic list answer retrieval. In Proc. of TREC-16, 2007. [9] X. Yin, X. Huang, and Z. Li. Promoting ranking diversity for biomedical information retrieval using wikipedia. In Proc. of the 32nd ECIR, 2010.

902

Low Cost Evaluation in Information Retrieval
Ben Carterette
University of Delaware, carteret@cis.udel.edu
Evangelos Kanoulas
University of Sheffield, e.kanoulas@sheffield.ac.uk
Emine Yilmaz
Microsoft Research Cambridge, eminey@microsoft.com

Abstract:
Search corpora are growing larger and larger: over the last 10 years, the IR research community has moved from the several hundred thousand documents on the TREC disks to the tens of millions of U.S. government web pages of GOV2 to the one billion general-interest web pages in the new ClueWeb09 collection. But traditional means of acquiring relevance judgments and evaluating ­ e.g. pooling documents to calculate average precision ­ do not seem to scale well to these new large collections. They require substantially more cost in human assessments for the same reliability in evaluation; if the additional cost goes over the assessing budget, errors in evaluation are inevitable.
Some alternatives to pooling that support low-cost and reliable evaluation have recently been proposed. A number of them have already been used in TREC and other evaluation forums (TREC Million Query, Legal, Chemical, Web, Relevance Feedback Tracks, CLEF Patent IR, INEX). Evaluation via implicit user feedback (e.g. clicks) and crowdsourcing have also recently gained attention in the community. Thus it is important that the methodologies, the analysis they support, and their strengths and weaknesses are well-understood by the IR community. Furthermore, these approaches can support small research groups attempting to start investigating new tasks on new corpora with relatively low cost. Even groups that do not participate in TREC, CLEF, or other evaluation conferences can benefit from understanding how these methods work, how to use them, and what they mean as they build test collections for tasks they are interested in.
The goal of this tutorial is to provide attendees with a comprehensive overview of techniques to perform low cost (in terms of judgment effort) evaluation. A number of topics will be covered, including alternatives to pooling, evaluation measures robust to incomplete judgments, evaluating with no relevance judgments, statistical inference of evaluation metrics, inference of relevance judgments, query selection, techniques to test the reliability of the evaluation and reusability of the constructed collections.
The tutorial should be of interest to a wide range of attendees. Those new to the field will come away with a solid understanding of how low cost evaluation methods can be applied to construct inexpensive test collections and evaluate new IR technology, while those with intermediate knowledge will gain deeper insights and further understand the risks and gains of low cost evaluation. Attendees should have a basic
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR'10, July 19­23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland. ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

knowledge of the traditional evaluation framework (Cranfield) and metrics (such as average precision and nDCG), along with some basic knowledge on probability theory and statistics. More advanced concepts will be explained during the tutorial.
ACM Categories & Descriptors:
H.3.4 Information Storage and Retrieval; Performance evaluation (efficiency and effectiveness)
General Terms:
Experimentation, Measurement
Keywords:
information retrieval, evaluation, test collections
Bios
Ben Carterette is an Assistant Professor of Computer and Information Sciences at the University of Delaware, where he teaches Information Retrieval, Databases, and Artificial Intelligence. He has published extensively on constructing and using test collections for low cost. He has co-organized two SIGIR workshops on test collections that go beyond binary independent relevance judgments, and co-coordinated the TREC Million Query track from 2007­2009 as well as the TREC Session track in 2010. He is also co-organizing a SIGIR workshop on constructing the next generation of information retrieval test collections.
Evangelos Kanoulas is a postdoctoral researcher (Marie Curie fellow) in the Department of Information Studies at the University of Sheffield. He received his Ph.D. from Northeastern University. His main research interest is evaluation methods for information retrieval. He has published papers in SIGIR and CIKM. Further, Evangelos was actively involved in coordinating the Million Query Track in TREC 2007 ­ 2009 and he is one of the co-coordinators of the TREC 2010 Session Track.
Emine Yilmaz is a postdoctoral researcher in the Information Retrieval and Analysis Group at Microsoft Research Cambridge. She obtained her Ph.D. from Northeastern University. Most of her current work involves evaluation of retrieval systems, the effect of evaluation metrics on learning to rank problems and modeling user behavior. Her main interests are information retrieval and applications of information theory, statistics and machine learning. She has previously published research papers at major information retrieval venues, including SIGIR, CIKM and served as one of the organizers of the ICTIR Conference in 2009. She is also one of the organizers of a SIGIR workshop on crowdsourcing.

903

904

Learning to Rank for Information Retrieval
Tie-Yan Liu,
Microsoft Research Asia, tyliu@microsoft.com

Abstract: This tutorial is concerned with a comprehensive introduction to the research area of learning to rank for information retrieval. In the first part of the tutorial, we will introduce three major approaches to learning to rank, i.e., the pointwise, pairwise, and listwise approaches, analyze the relationship between the loss functions used in these approaches and the widely-used IR evaluation measures, evaluate the performance of these approaches on the LETOR benchmark datasets, and demonstrate how to use these approaches to solve real ranking applications. In the second part of the tutorial, we will discuss some advanced topics regarding learning to rank, such as relational ranking, diverse ranking, semi-supervised ranking, transfer ranking, query-dependent ranking, and training data preprocessing. In the third part, we will briefly mention the recent advances in statistical learning theory for ranking, which explain the generalization ability and statistical consistency of different ranking methods. In the last part, we will conclude the tutorial and show several future research directions.
ACM Categories & Descriptors: H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Retrieval models; I.2.6 [Learning]: Parameter learning.

General Terms: Algorithms, Experimentation, Theory.
Keywords: Learning to Rank, Information Retrieval, Learning Theory, Ranking Models.
Bio: Tie-Yan Liu is a lead researcher at Microsoft Research Asia. He leads a team working on learning to rank for information retrieval, and large-scale graph learning. So far, he has more than 70 quality papers published in referred conferences and journals and over 50 filed US / international patents or pending applications. He is the co-author of the Best Student Paper for SIGIR 2008, and the Most Cited Paper for the Journal of Visual Communication and Image Representation (2004~2006). He is a Program Committee Co-Chair of RIAO (2010), an Area Chair of SIGIR (2008~2010) and AIRS (2009~2010), a Co-Chair of SIGIR workshop on learning to rank for IR (2007~2009), a Co-Chair of ICML workshop on learning to rank (2010), and a Program Committee member of many other international conferences such as WWW, ICML, KDD, WSDM, and ACL. He is on the Editorial Board of the Information Retrieval Journal (IRJ), and is a guest editor of the special issue on learning to rank of IRJ. He has given tutorials on learning to rank at several conferences including SIGIR 2008, WWW 2008, and WWW 2009.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR'10, July 19­23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland. ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.
904

Estimating the Query Difficulty for Information Retrieval
David Carmel, Elad Yom-Tov
IBM Research lab in Haifa, {carmel,yomtov}@il.ibm.com

Abstract:
Many information retrieval (IR) systems suffer from a radical variance in performance when responding to users' queries. Even for systems that succeed very well on average, the quality of results returned for some of the queries is poor. Thus, it is desirable that IR systems will be able to identify "difficult" queries in order to handle them properly. Understanding why some queries are inherently more difficult than others is essential for IR, and a good answer to this important question will help search engines to reduce the variance in performance, hence better servicing their customer needs.
The high variability in query performance has driven a new research direction in the IR field on estimating the expected quality of the search results, i.e. the query difficulty, when no relevance feedback is given. Estimating the query difficulty is a significant challenge due to the numerous factors that impact retrieval performance. Many prediction methods have been proposed recently. However, as many researchers observed, the prediction quality of state-of-the-art predictors is still too low to be widely used by IR applications. The low prediction quality is due to the complexity of the task, which involves factors such as query ambiguity, missing content, and vocabulary mismatch.
The goal of this tutorial is to expose participants to the current research on query performance prediction (also known as query difficulty estimation). Participants will become familiar with states-of-the-art performance prediction methods, and with common evaluation methodologies for prediction quality. We will discuss the reasons that cause search engines to fail for some of the queries, and provide an overview of several approaches for estimating query difficulty. We then describe common methodologies for evaluating the prediction quality of those estimators, and some experiments conducted recently with their prediction quality, as measured over several TREC benchmarks. We will cover a few potential applications that can utilize query difficulty estimators by handling each query individually and selectively based on its estimated difficulty. Finally we will summarize with a discussion on open issues and challenges in the field.
ACM Categories & Descriptors:
H.3.3 [Information Search
and Retrieval]: Retrieval models

General Terms:
Algorithms, Measurement
Keywords:
Retrieval robustness, Query difficulty estimation, Performance prediction
Bio/Bios:
David Carmel is a Research Staff Member at the Information Retrieval group at IBM Haifa Research Laboratory. David earned his PhD in Computer Science from the Technion, Israel Institute of Technology in 1997. David's research is focused on search in the enterprise, query performance prediction, social search, and text mining. For several years David taught the Introduction to IR course at the CS department at Haifa University.
At IBM, David is a key contributor to IBM enterprise search offerings. David is a co-founder of the Juru search engine which provides integrated search capabilities to several IBM products, and was used as a search platform for several studies in the TREC conferences. David has published more than 60 papers in Information retrieval and Web journals and conferences, and serves in the Program Committee of many conferences (SIGIR, WWW, WSDM, CIKM, ECIR) and workshops.
Elad Yom-Tov is a Research Staff Member at the Analytics Department at the IBM Haifa Research Laboratory. The main focus of his work is research into methods for large-scale machine learning, with a recent focus on social analytics. Prior to his current position he worked at Rafael Inc., where he applied machine learning to image processing. Elad is a graduate of Tel-Aviv University (B.Sc.) and the Technion, Haifa (M.Sc. and Ph.D). He is the author (with David Stork) of the Computer Manual to accompany Pattern classification, a book and a Matlab toolbox on pattern classification.
Elad's work in Information Retrieval includes query difficulty estimation, social tagging, and novelty detection.
Both David and Elad published many papers on query performance prediction, and organized a workshop on this subject in SIGIR 2005. Their paper on learning to estimate query difficulty won the Best Paper Award at SIGIR 2005.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR'10, July 19­23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland. ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.
911

Learning Hidden Variable Models for Blog Retrieval
Mengqiu Wang
Computer Science Department Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305, USA
mengqiu@cs.stanford.edu

ABSTRACT
We describe probabilistic models that leverage individual blog post evidence to improve blog seed retrieval performances. Our model offers a intuitive and principled method to combine multiple posts in scoring a whole blog site by treating individual posts as hidden variables. When applied to the seed retrieval task, our model yields state-of-the-art results on the TREC 2007 Blog Distillation Task dataset.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Retrieval Models

General Terms
Design, Algorithms, Experimentation, Performance

Keywords
Learning to Rank, Passage Retrieval, Blog Retrieval

1. INTRODUCTION
In blog seed retrieval tasks, we are interested in finding blogs with relevant and recurring interests for given topics. Rather than ranking individual blog posts, whole sites are ranked (i.e. all posts within a blog). We propose two discriminatively trained probabilistic models that model individual posts as hidden variables.

2. PROBABILISTIC PASSAGE MODELS

We make a modeling assumption that given a set of topranked passages of a document, the document is relevant if any one of the passages is relevant.
The first independent model (IND) assumes that the relevance of a specific top-ranked passage si is independent of the relevance of any other passage in s. We use the logistic function to model the relevance of a passage. Our second model (RBM) takes a step further and exploit the correlations among individual passages in a Restricted Boltzmann Machine framework.

P (z = 0|s) = e-f(s)
1+e-f (s)

P (z^|s))

=

1 Z

exp(Pi<j

f

(si

,

sj

,

zi,

zj

)

+

P|s|
i=1

g(si

,

zi

))

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR'10, July 19­23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland. ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

where f (s) is a feature vector of the passage s, and  is
the corresponding weight vector. Z is the partition function computed by summing over all possible relevance assignments. f (si, sj, zi, zj) are passage correlation features (cosine-sim, URL overlapping) and g(si, zi) are passage relevance feature (e.g., rank, score).

3. BLOG SEED RETRIEVAL
We evaluated our models on TREC 2007 Blog Distillation Track dataset. We would first obtain top 5 ranked passages for each document using Indri's LM-based retrieval system, and then apply our model to re-rank each document. Training and testing is done by performing 5-fold cross-validation. We compare our models with four strong baselines. The first two are the Indri language model passage and document retrieval systems (Indri-psg, Indri-doc). The third one is the CMU system, which gives the best performance in TREC 2007 and 2008 evaluations [1]. The last one is the ReDDE federated search algorithm used in [2]. Our IND model showed significant improvements over the Indri passage and document retrieval baselines (58.5% and 9.4% relative improvements). The RBM model gained a small improvement over the IND model, and significantly outperformed the baseline CMU and ReDDE models.

Baseline

This work

Indri-psg 0.2267

IND

0.3596

Indri-doc 0.3284

RBM

0.3702

CMU 0.3385 RBM+cosine sim 0.3779

ReDDE 0.3150 RBM+url 0.3685

4. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we introduced two probabilistic models that model individual blog posts as hidden variables for blog seed retrieval tasks. Our models produced state-of-the-art results on TREC 2007 Blog Distillation dataset.
5. REFERENCES
[1] J. Elsas, J. Arguello, J. Callan, and J. Carbonell. Retrieval and feedback models for blog distillation. In Proceedings of TREC, 2007.
[2] J. Elsas, J. Arguello, J. Callan, and J. Carbonell. Retrieval and feedback models for blog feed search. In Proceedings of SIGIR, 2008.

922

Investigation on Smoothing and Aggregation Methods in Blog Retrieval

Mostafa Keikha
Faculty of Informatics, University of Lugano Lugano, Switzerland
mostafa.keikha@usi.ch

ABSTRACT
Recently, user generated data is growing rapidly and becoming one of the most important source of information in the web. Blogosphere (the collection of blogs on the web) is one of the main source of information in this category. In my work for my PhD, I mainly focussed on the blog distillation task which is: given a user query find the blogs that are most related to the query topic [3].
There are some properties of blogs that make blog analysis different from usual text analysis. One of these properties is related to the time stamp assigned to each post; it is possible that the topics of a blog change over the time and this can affect blog relevance to the query. Also each post in a blog can have viewer generated comments that can change the relevance of the blog to the query if these are considered as part of the content of the blog. Another property is related to the meaning of the links between blogs which are different than links between websites. Finally, blog distillation is different from traditional ad-hoc search since the retrieval unit is a blog (a collection of posts), instead of a single document. With this view, blog distillation is similar to the task of resource selection in federated search [1].
Researchers have applied different methods from similar problems to blog distillation like ad-hoc search methods, expert search algorithms or methods from resource selection in distributed information retrieval.
Based on our preliminary experiments, I decided to divide the blog distillation problem into two sub-problems. First of all, I want to use mentioned properties of blogs to retrieve the most relevant posts for a given query. This part is very similar to the ad hoc retrieval. After that, I want to aggregate relevance of posts in each blog and calculate relevance of the blog. This part requires the development of a crossmodal aggregation model that combines the different blog relevance clues found in the blogosphere.
We use structure based smoothing methods for improving posts retrieval. The idea behind these smoothing methods is to change the score of a document based on the score of its similar or related documents. We model the blogosphere as a single graph that represents relations between posts and terms [2]. The idea is that in accordance with the Clustering Hypothesis, related documents should have similar scores for the same query. To model the relatedness between posts, we
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR'10, July 19­23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

define a new measure which takes into account both content similarity and temporal distance.
In more recent work, in the aggregation part of the problem, we model each post as evidence about relevance of a blog to the query, and use aggregation methods like Ordered Weighted Averaging operators to combine the evidence. The ordered weighted averaging operator, commonly called OWA operator, was introduced by Yager [4]. OWA provides a parametrized class of mean type aggregation operators, that can generate OR operator (M ax), AN D operator (M in) and any other aggregation operator between them.
For the next steps, I'm thinking about capturing the temporal properties of the blogs. Bloggers can change their interests over the time or write about different topics periodically. Capturing these changes and using them in the retrieval is one the future woks that I'm interested in. Also, studying the relations between blogs and news and their effect on each other is an interesting problem.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search and Retrieval
General Terms
Algorithms
Keywords
Blog search, Temporal analysis, User generated data.
1. REFERENCES
[1] J. L. Elsas, J. Arguello, J. Callan, and J. G. Carbonell. Retrieval and feedback models for blog feed search. In SIGIR, pages 347­354, 2008.
[2] M. Keikha, M. J. Carman, and F. Crestani. Blog distillation using random walks. In SIGIR, pages 638­639, 2009.
[3] I. Ounis, M. De Rijke, C. Macdonald, G. Mishne, and I. Soboroff. Overview of the TREC-2006 blog track. In Proceedings of TREC, pages 15­27, 2006.
[4] R. Yager. On ordered weighted averaging aggregation operators in multicriteria decision making. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern., 18(1):183­190, 1988.

923

A Joint Probabilistic Classification Model for Resource Selection


Dzung Hong , Luo Si
Department of Computer Science Purdue University
250 N. University Street West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA
{dthong, lsi}@cs.purdue.edu

Paul Bracke, Michael Witt
Purdue University Libraries Purdue University
504 West State Street West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA
{pbracke,mwitt}@purdue.edu

Tim Juchcinski
Department of Computer Science Purdue University
250 N. University Street West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA
tjuchcin@purdue.edu

ABSTRACT
Resource selection is an important task in Federated Search to select a small number of most relevant information sources. Current resource selection algorithms such as GlOSS, CORI, ReDDE, Geometric Average and the recent classificationbased method focus on the evidence of individual information sources to determine the relevance of available sources. Current algorithms do not model the important relationship information among individual sources. For example, an information source tends to be relevant to a user query if it is similar to another source with high probability of being relevant. This paper proposes a joint probabilistic classification model for resource selection. The model estimates the probability of relevance of information sources in a joint manner by considering both the evidence of individual sources and their relationship. An extensive set of experiments have been conducted on several datasets to demonstrate the advantage of the proposed model.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search and Retrieval
General Terms
Algorithms, Design, Performance
Keywords
Federated Search, Resource Selection, Joint Classification
1. INTRODUCTION
Federated text search provides a unified search interface for multiple search engines of distributed text information sources. There are three major research problems in federated search as resource representation, resource selection
Vietnam Education Foundation Fellow
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. SIGIR'10, July 19­23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland. Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07 ...$10.00.

and results merging. This paper focuses on resource selection, which selects a small number of most relevant information sources to search for any particular user query.
Resource selection for federated search has been a popular research topic in the last two decades. Many methods treat each information source as a single big document and rank available sources either by using statistics from the sample documents (CORI [6]), or by building a language model for each source (Xu and Croft [27], Si and Callan [22]). Other methods such as GlOSS [12], Geometric Average [17], ReDDE [20], CRCS [18] and SUSHI [24] look further inside an information source by estimating the relevance of each document and calculate the source's score as an aggregate function of the documents that the source contains. More recent methods such as the classification-based method [1] and the work in [2] treat resource selection as a classification problem and build probabilistic models by combining multiple types of evidence of individual sources.
Existing resource selection methods judge an information source by its own characteristics, but miss an important piece of evidence, which is the relationship between available sources. In practice, we notice that relationship can be meaningful and indicative. An information source that is "similar" to another highly relevant source has a better chance of being relevant. The evidence of source relationship can be very valuable for real world federated search solutions. In particular, the resource representation (e.g., sample documents) of each information source is often limited and prevents resource selection algorithms from identifying relevant sources, while the relationship between sources can help to alleviate the problem by providing more evidence from similar sources. Our study of a real world federated search application with digital libraries also suggests that it is difficult to obtain thorough resource representation from many sources (i.e., digital libraries). For example, some sources may only provide the abstracts of its documents instead of the full texts.
This paper proposes a novel probabilistic discriminative model for resource selection that explicitly models the relationship between information sources. In particular, the new research combines both the evidence of individual sources and the relationship evidence between sources into a single probabilistic model for estimating the joint probability of relevance of a set of sources. Different similarity metrics have been studied to explore the relationship between information sources. An extensive set of experiments have been conducted on two TREC testbeds for federated search

98

research and one real world application for searching digital libraries. The experiment results demonstrate the effectiveness and robustness of the proposed resource selection algorithm with the joint classification model.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: the next section discusses the related research work. Section 3 presents the classification model for resource selection. Section 4 proposes the joint classification model. Section 5 discusses experimental methodology. Section 6 presents experimental results and related discussions. Section 7 concludes and points out some future research work.
2. RELATED WORK
There has been considerable research on all of the three subtasks of federated search as resource representation, resource selection and results merging. Since this paper focuses on the resource selection task, we mainly survey most related prior research work in resource selection and briefly talk about resource representation and results merging.
The first step in federated search is to obtain representative resource descriptions from available information sources. The START protocol [11] provides accurate information in collaborative federated search environments, but it does not work for uncooperative environments. On other side, the query-based sampling technique [4] has been widely used in federated search to obtain sample documents from each source by issuing randomly generated queries. In particular, the query-based sampling approach is used in this work to acquire sample documents from available sources. After that, all sample documents are merged together as a centralized sample database.
Resource selection selects a small set of most relevant sources for each user query [3][8][13]. Most early resource selection algorithms treat each individual source as a single big document which they extract summary statistics from. Those big document methods such as KL [27], CORI [6], and CVV [28] utilize different types of summary statistics of sources and finally rank available sources by matching the statistics with the user's query. These methods ignore the boundaries of individual documents within individual sources, which limits their performance of identifying sources with a large number of relevant documents.
Some recent resource selection algorithms such as ReDDE [20], DTF [9][10], CRCS [18] and SUSHI [24] step away from treating each source as a single big document. Those algorithms often analyze individual sample documents within resource representation for ranking sources. For example, the ReDDE selection algorithm estimates the distribution of relevant documents by treating top-ranked sample documents as a representative subset of relevant documents in available sources. Related algorithms such as UUM [22], RUM [23] and CRCS [18] have been proposed, which use different methods to weight top-ranked documents and estimate the probability of relevance.
More recent resource selection algorithms such as the classification-based resource selection in federated search [1] or vertical search [2] treat resource selection as a classification problem. A classification model can be learned from a set of training queries and is used to predict the relevance of a source for test queries. It has been shown [1] that the classification approach can outperform state-of-the-art resource selection algorithms like ReDDE.
Existing resource selection methods utilize evidence within

individual sources to judge their relevance but ignore the evidence of the relationship between available sources. However, the relationship evidence is a valuable piece of information, which promises to improve the accuracy of resource selection.
Two other related research work in [25][7] learn from the results of past queries for resource selection. However, these two methods do not model the relationship between information sources and do not use formal models based on classification.
The last step of federated search is results merging, which merges returned documents from selected sources into a single list. The most effective method is to download and recalculate scores for all returned documents within a centralized retrieval model, but this is often inefficient. More efficient methods such as the CORI merging formula, the SSL [21] and the SAFE merging algorithms [19] try to approximate the results of centralized retrieval in different ways.
3. CLASSIFICATION MODEL
3.1 Classification Approach
Many resource selection algorithms are unsupervised and provide one source of evidence. To combine different evidence in a unified framework, one needs a training dataset, usually in the form of binary judgments on sources. Specifically, given a set of sources C and a set of training queries Q, the objective is to find a mapping F of the form
F : Q × C  {+1, -1}
where +1 indicates the relevance between the query and the source, and -1 indicates irrelevance.
Arguello et al.[1] have proposed a method to construct those judgments. Each query q  Q will be issued to a fulldataset index for searching. A source Ci  C is considered to be relevant with q if more than  documents from Ci are present in top T of the full-dataset result. Otherwise, it is marked as irrelevant.
While this method can produce a rank list that mimics the rank list produced by a full-dataset retrieval, it is difficult to apply in a real world environment because of the absence of a full-dataset. We propose an alternative method that could be more feasible. A query q is now issued to each remote source Ci and we only count their returned documents that are relevant. Top T documents from each source will be inspected, then a source is marked as relevant if it has more than  relevant documents presenting in that list. In our work, we set T = 100. For dataset with a large average number of relevant documents per query (over 100), we set  = 3; otherwise  is equal to 1.
3.2 Sources of Evidence
This section presents different types of evidence of individual sources for building our classification model.
3.2.1 Big Document
Big Document (BIGDOC) approach treats each information source as a big document that contains all of its sample documents. A query is then issued to an index which contains a set of big documents, each representing one source. Sources are then ranked by how their merged sample documents match the query. The disadvantage of this method is that it does not take into account the variation of sources'

99

sizes. Assuming that the sampling process is uniform, for a very big source, the sampling process only covers a small fraction of its documents. Therefore, it may present fewer relevant documents in the centralized sample database than a much smaller one, although the absolute number of relevant documents in the big source is higher. Without considering the sources' sizes, it would be misleading to conclude that the small source is the better choice. Nevertheless, when combined with other features, BIGDOC could have a good contribution, especially in the case that many sources contain roughly the same number of documents. While CORI (discussed in the next part) also treats each source as one document, BIGDOC approach is more flexible since it can be used with different retrieval algorithms. In our experiments, the algorithm is Indri [14]. For each pair of a query and a source, one BIGDOC feature is built from the sample documents.

3.2.2 CORI
The CORI resource selection algorithm [6] uses Bayesian Inference Network model to rank sources. The belief P (q|Ci) that a source Ci satisfies query q is the combination of multiple P (rj|Ci), the belief corresponding to each term rj of query q. CORI applies a variant of tf.idf formula to determine each P (rj|Ci) and combine them together to calculate the final belief score of each source. CORI was proven to have robust performance for resource selection. In our experiments, one CORI feature is used for each pair of a query and a source.

3.2.3 Geometric Average

In this method, a query is first issued to a centralized sample database, which was mentioned in section 2. Then, each source Ci is scored according to the geometric average query likelihood of its top K sample documents [17],

K

1 K

GAV Gq(Ci) =

P (q|dij )

j=1

where dij is the j-th sample document in the rank list of source Ci. If Ci presents less than K documents in the rank list, the product above is padded with the minimum query likelihood score.

3.2.4 Modified ReDDE & ReDDE.top
Recall that ReDDE score [20] is calculated according to :

ReDDEq (Ci )

=

Niest Nisamp



×

I (d

dRsNamp



Ci) × Pq(rel|d)

where RsNamp is the top N documents returned from searching the centralized sample database. Niest is the estimated size of source Ci, Nisamp is the sample size of Ci, and I(.) is the indicator function. The number of top returned documents, N , is equal to  × Naelslt, where Naelslt is the estimated total number of documents of all sources and  is a constant,
which is usually in the range 0.002-0.005.
ReDDE uses a step function to estimate Pq(rel|d), the probability that the document d is relevant to query q. For
all top N documents, that probability is equal to a constant.
In our experiment, we use a modified version of ReDDE,
which replaces Pq(rel|d) by P (q|d), the retrieval score of document d with respect to query q. The Indri retrieval

algorithm [14] is used for searching the centralized sample database. The modified ReDDE feature has been shown empirically better than the original ReDDE feature. There is one modified ReDDE feature for each pair of a query and a source.
ReDDE.top [1] is another variant of ReDDE. Unlike ReDDE, ReDDE.top set a specific number to N . In our experiment, we add another two ReDDE.top features with N = 100 and N = 1000 respectively.

4. JOINT CLASSIFICATION MODEL

4.1 Probabilistic Discriminative Model
We propose a novel joint probabilistic model for the resource selection task. First of all, a logistic model is built to combine all the features of individual sources. We refer to this model as the independent model (Ind).
Let v = {v1, ..., vn} be the relevance vector. vi = 1 indicates that the i-th source is relevant, otherwise vi = 0. The relevance probability of a source ci given its feature vector f(ci) is calculated as:

P (vi

=

1|ci)

=

1

exp(f(ci) · ) + exp(f(ci) · )

where  denotes the combination weight vector. For simplicity, the vector f(ci) contains the bias feature (which is 1 for every pair of a query and a source) and the weight vector
contains the bias element 0. The conditional probability of v given n sources is:

P (v|c)

=

1 Z

n exp

log P

(vi

=

1|ci)vi P (vi

=

0|ci)1-vi

i

where Z is the normalizing constant. Our joint classification model (Jnt) expands the above
formula with a new term to model the relationship between sources. The conditional probability of v given n sources is now:

P (v|c)

=

1 Z

n exp

log P (vi

=

1|ci)vi P (vi

=

0|ci)1-vi

+

|v|

i


sim(ci, cj )vivj

i,j(i<j)

which can be rewritten as:

P (v|c)

=

1 Z

n exp

(1

-

vi

)(f(ci)

·

)

-

log(1

+

exp(f(ci)

·

))

+

|v|

i


sim(ci, cj )vivj

i,j(i<j)

where sim(ci, cj) denotes the similarity between two sources ci and cj, and Z is another normalizing constant.
The parameter  controls the influence of similarity. If || is high, the model tends to promote only similar (or dissimilar) sources. When  = 0, we get back to the independent model.
In the learning step, we learn the feature weight vector  from the independent model by using logistic regression. This vector is then used in the joint model. Learning , however, is generally intractable. One can see that the space of vector v is 2n, and so inferencing and estimation become

100

impossible when n is large. We resolve this issue by first ranking the sources using the independent model, and then apply the joint classification model only to the top K = 10 sources. This is equivalent to reranking the top K sources.
From the set of training queries, we use maximum loglikelihood estimation to learn the parameter . Because there is no closed-form solution for the maximum of this loglikelihood function, gradient search method is used instead.
In the prediction step, for a test query, the score of each source ci is assigned by its probability of being relevant:
R(ci) = P (vi = 1|c) = P (v1, v2, ..., vi = 1, ..., vn|c)
v\vi
where v\vi denotes the set of variables in v with variable vi omitted. In practice, the summation is taken over K - 1 variables and so is feasible when K is small. After that, the top K sources will be reranked according to the new score.
4.2 Similarity Metrics

4.2.1 Similarity Metric based-on Evaluation
Given a set of training queries, the similarity between two sources can be measured by looking at the set of queries for wich they are both relevant. The bigger that set is, the more related they are. Specifically, we apply a cross-product formula to measure this metric:
SM E(ci, cj) = rel(ci, q)rel(cj, q)
qQ
where Q is the set of training queries, rel(ci, q) is equal to 1 if source ci is relevant to query q based on the classification approach described above, otherwise it is 0. This method is called Similarity Metric based-on Evaluation (SME).

4.2.2 Similarity Metric based-on Query-specific
Evaluation
One issue with the SME is that it is independent of the query. A source may be highly related with another source with respect to a query but unrelated with that source with respect to another query. Therefore, it is better to incorporate the similarity between queries into this formula. By extending the above SME, we derive another metric called Similarity Metric based on Query-specific Evaluation (SMQE).



SM QEq(ci, cj ) =

sim(q, q)rel(ci, q)rel(cj , q)

q Q

where sim(q, q) denotes the correlation (or similarity) between the test query q and a training query q. There are many studies that explore the topicality or classification of queries, however, in this paper, we choose one simple approach. A query in consideration is issued to the centralized sample database, and the number of documents from each source that appear in top M documents of the result is recorded. In our work, M is equal to 100. The correlation between two queries is derived by a cosine-like formula:

sim(q, q)

=




i

numdoc(q,

ci)numdoc(q



,

ci

)

i numdoc(q, ci)2 i numdoc(q, ci)2

where numdoc(q, ci) is the number of documents of source ci that appear in the top M documents returned from query q.

Both the SME and SMQE metrics can be modified in many ways. First of all, the term rel(i, q) can be represented either by a binary number or the absolute number of relevant documents. Or we can set different thresholds to the searching on the centralized sample database. Another choice is to normalize the relevance vector. However, in our experiments, those changes do not have much effect on the results. In fact, SMQE provides the best result, proving that it better reflects the relationship between sources.
4.2.3 Similarity-Metric based-on Kullback-Leibler
divergence
This method tries to reveal the similarity between sources by looking at their own vocabularies. Specifically, a language model [16] is built for each sample source. Then we calculate the Kullback-Leibler divergence between those two language models. Recall that the Kullback-Leibler divergence is actually the distance between two probabilistic models, which is the inverse of their similarity. However, because our model can adapt this change by inferring a negative similarity coefficient , we keep the KL-value as it is. This metric is referred to as SMKL.
5. EXPERIMENTAL METHODOLOGY
We evaluate our proposed algorithms on 3 datasets. The first two datasets are well-known TREC testbeds, the last one comes from a real world application.
· TREC123-100col-bysource (TREC123): 100 collections (information sources) were created from TREC CDs 1,2 and 3 [3]. They are organized by publication source and publication date. The size of each source varies from 7,000 to 39,700 documents (see Table 1 for more statistics). This testbed comes with 100 queries (TREC topics 51-150) with judgments.
· TREC4-100col-bysource (TREC4): 100 collections were created according to the publication source of documents in TREC4 [26]. One actual publication source is distributed across a number of information sources depending on its total number of documents. Each information source has roughly 5,675 documents. This testbed comes with 50 queries (TREC topics 201250) with judgments. More statistics about both TREC123 and TREC4 are presented in Table 1.
· Digital Library (DIGLIB): This real world dataset contains 80 sources (i.e., digital libraries) that are accessible from Purdue University Libraries1. This testbed presents a heterogeneous sources of information. Each document from those sources composes of many fields. Three fields that convey rich information are the abstract, subject heading (or document's category) and full text. Not all sources provide all those three fields. A document from one source may not be provided with its full text, while a document from another source may not have the subject heading. Table 2 shows that only 65% of 80 sources provide abstracts, 65% provide subject headings, and only 30% provide full texts. In our current work, we temporally merge all those available information into one document. Future research may
1We make the dataset available as feature file at http://www.cs.purdue.edu/homes/dthong/

101

Table 1: Summary Statistics of TREC123 and TREC4

Testbed
TREC123 TREC4

Size (GB)
3.2 2.0

Number of Documents (x1000) Min Avg Max 0.7 10.8 39.7 5.6 5.6 5.6

Size(MB)
Min Avg Max 28 32 42 4 20 138

Rk

=

k ki=1
i=1

Ei Bi

Let Ei denote the number of relevant documents of the i-th source according to the ranking E, Bi denote the same thing with respect to ranking B. We also report the results at P @{1, 3, 5, 10} as in source level accuracy.

Table 2: Statistical Information about DIGLIB: Number of Sources Corresponding to their Available Information Fields
Abstract Subject Full Text Number of Sources 52(65%) 52(65%) 24(30%)

· Document Level, High Precision: To make it independent from result merging algorithm, we use fulldataset retrieval as our merging method. The chosen retrieval algorithm is Inquery in Lemur Toolkit [5]. For each query, top 5 sources from the joint classification rank list are selected for this step. Documents not from selected sources are filtered out from the full-dataset rank list. The remaining list is checked by their precision at P @{5, 10, 15, 20, 30} accordingly. We also report a full-dataset precision which includes all sources.

consider to treat each source differently according the type of information that is available.
We also build a set of 100 queries, some of them are extracted from the library log, which are real queries. For each pair of a query and a source, we manually assign a binary value to indicate their relevance.

On TREC123 and TREC4, all tests at different levels are presented. On DIGLIB dataset, we only report the results at source level because the document judgments are difficult to make as many sources do not provide their full text information. In most of the experiments, SMQE is used as our default similarity metric. However, in section 6.4, we also discuss the experimental results with different other metrics.

A note on resource specific retrieval algorithm: DIGLIB is a real world application of digital libraries, each of its sources implements a different retrieval algorithm, which is not known. We can only access those sources through a unified interface. For TREC123 and TREC4, we assign one retrieval algorithm to each source in a round-robin manner. The set of assigned algorithms is Inquery, Language Model and Vector Space (tf.idf). These algorithms influence the query-based sampling process, as well as the classification process. A less effective retrieval algorithm like Vector Space model may reduce a source's chance of being marked as relevant.
For each testbed, we repeat every experiment 5 times. In each trial, we randomly select 50% of the queries as training set, and test on the other 50%. All the results shown in the next section are averaged over 5 trials.
Each source is sampled with 300 documents. We also compare the main results with 100 sample documents. The experiments are measured on several levels:
· Source Level (Resource Selection), Accuracy: This level measures the precision of the resource selection algorithms. Top sources (i.e., top 10) are judged by their precisions at different levels. The judgments come from the classification method, as described in section 3.1. We report the results at P @{1, 3, 5, 10} accordingly.
· Source Level, Recall Metric (R-metric): This metric is widely used in comparing resource selection algorithms [3]. Let E denote the ranking produced by a resource selection algorithm, B denote the based line ranking, in this case, the Relevance-Based Ranking. At level k, the R-metric is defined as:

6. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In all of our experiments, we use paired t-test on queries to check significance. A  denotes a significance on p < 0.1 level;  corresponds to p < 0.05 level and  corresponds to p < 0.01 level.
6.1 TREC123 & TREC4
First of all, we compare the joint classification model with the independent model on the two TREC testbeds. Table 3 represents the source level results in accuracy on TREC123 and TREC4. The second column of each dataset is the joint classification model. Numbers in parentheses show the relative improvement of the joint classification model (denoted as "Jnt") over the independent model (denoted as "Ind").
Table 4 shows the R-metric comparison between the independent model and joint classification model. Table 5 shows the high precision at document level. We also report the full centralized retrieval, which includes all sources. This is denoted as the "Full" column in the table.
It can be seen that joint classification model always leads to better results than independent model, as it shows in all three tables. Both models have the same source level accuracy and R-metric values at top 10 because of the fact that we rerank the top 10 sources. The results are more statistically significant on TREC123 than on TREC4. This can be explained as in TREC123, we have trained on 50 queries; whereas in TREC4, we use only 25 queries out of 50 for training.
6.2 Digital Library
The result at source level of Digital Library is reported in Table 6. In this real world dataset, the joint classification model significantly outperforms the independent model. This accounts to the fact that many sources only provide

102

Table 3: Source Level Results in Accuracy on TREC123 & TREC4 with 300 Sample Documents

Table 5: Document Level Results in High Precision on TREC123 & TREC4 with 300 Sample Documents

Src Rank
@1 @3 @5 @10

TREC123

Ind 0.512 0.456 0.451 0.439

Jnt 0.524(2.3%) 0.499(9.4%) 0.484(7.3%)
0.439(0%)

TREC4

Ind 0.480 0.451 0.430 0.414

Jnt 0.536(11.7%) 0.475(5.3%) 0.446(3.7%)
0.414(0%)

Docs Rank
@5 @10 @15 @20 @30

Full 0.446 0.444 0.435 0.430 0.414

TREC123

Ind 0.392 0.355 0.332 0.309 0.280

Jnt 0.410(4.6%) 0.360(1.4%) 0.347(4.5%) 0.326(5.5%) 0.300(7.1%)

Table 4: Source Level Results in R-metric on TREC123 & TREC4 with 300 Sample Documents

Src Rank
@1 @3 @5 @10

TREC123

Ind 0.262 0.309 0.354 0.426

Jnt 0.319(21.8%) 0.364(17.8%) 0.400(13.0%)
0.426(0%)

TREC4

Ind 0.287 0.324 0.343 0.414

Jnt 0.309(7.7%) 0.340(4.9%) 0.355(3.5%)
0.414(0%)

Docs Rank
@5 @10 @15 @20 @30

Full 0.549 0.459 0.422 0.384 0.354

TREC4

Ind 0.282 0.238 0.209 0.186 0.167

Jnt 0.290(2.8%) 0.254(6.7%) 0.224(7.2%) 0.200(7.5%) 0.170(1.8%)

partial information about themselves. This also shows that the joint classification model can alleviate the problem of missing information.
6.3 Tests with Different Sample Sizes
We conduct experiments on three datasets with only 100 documents sampled from each source. This test is to show the robustness of the model, as well as the effect of sampling size on the results. The results of source level (both in accuracy and R-metric) and document level are reported for TREC123 and TREC4 (Table 7, Table 8 and Table 9 respectively), while only source level is reported for DIGLIB (Table 10).
The sample size clearly affects TREC123. Its performance of the independent model drops significantly. However, this also leaves room for joint classification model to show its effectiveness: the accuracy on source level is statistically more significant. On document level, the improvement is a bit weaker. This can be explained as the initial choice of top 10 sources from the independent model is less precise, so is the joint classification model, which uses the initial ranking list directly.
Most results on TREC4 from Table 7 to Table 9 indicate the advantage of the joint classification model against independent model with a small number of sample documents, although the difference is smaller than TREC123 due to the limited amount of training information.
The results on DIGLIB (Table 10) are also consistent. The performances of both resource selection algorithms drop with 100 sample documents. However, the results of the joint classification method are still significantly better than those of the independent method.
6.4 Test with Different Similarity Metrics
We conduct tests on three testbeds with different similarity metrics discussed in Section 4.2. Figure 1 shows the

Table 6: Source Level Results in Accuracy on DIGLIB with 300 Sample Documents

Src Rank
@1 @3 @5 @10

DIGLIB

Ind 0.552 0.460 0.419 0.356

Jnt 0.640(15.9%) 0.536(16.5%) 0.487(16.2%)
0.356(0%)

Table 7: Source Level Results in Accuracy on TREC123 & TREC4 with 100 Sample Documents

Src Rank
@1 @3 @5 @10

TREC123

Ind 0.320 0.299 0.318 0.319

Jnt 0.380(18.8%) 0.373(24.7%) 0.357(12.3%)
0.319(0%)

TREC4

Ind
0.496 0.405 0.379 0.367

Jnt 0.480(-3.2%) 0.411(1.5%) 0.403(6.3%)
0.367(0%)

Table 8: Source Level Results in R-metric on TREC123 & TREC4 with 100 Sample Documents

Src Rank
@1 @3 @5 @10

TREC123

Ind 0.183 0.214 0.244 0.311

Jnt 0.233(27.3%) 0.262(22.4%) 0.279(14.3%)
0.311(0%)

TREC4

Ind 0.278 0.264 0.293 0.341

Jnt 0.317(14%) 0.293(11%) 0.311(6.1%)
0.341(0%)

103

Table 9: Document Level Results in High Precision on TREC123 & TREC4 with 100 Sample Documents

TREC123

0.3

0.42

SMQE

SME

0.4

Independent

0.28

SMKL

TREC4
SMQE SME Independent SMKL

Docs Rank
@5 @10 @15 @20 @30

TREC123

Ind 0.328 0.302 0.288 0.277 0.253

Jnt 0.329(0.3%) 0.316(4.6%) 0.306(6.2%) 0.296(6.9%) 0.268(5.9%)

TREC4

Ind 0.283 0.243 0.223 0.195 0.165

Jnt 0.301(6.4%) 0.254(4.5%) 0.227(1.8%) 0.204(4.6%) 0.166(0.6%)

Table 10: Source Level Results in Accuracy of DIGLIB with 100 Sample Documents

Precision Precision

0.38 0.36 0.34 0.32
0.3 0.28 0.26
0

10

20

Document Rank

0.26

0.24

0.22

0.2

0.18

0.16

30

0

10

20

30

Document Rank

Src Rank
@1 @3 @5 @10

DIGLIB

Ind 0.436 0.383 0.375 0.318

Jnt 0.620(42.2%) 0.531(38.6%) 0.474(26.4%)
0.318(0%)

results of TREC123 and TREC4 at document level. From this figure, we notice that the SMQE method outperforms all other metrics, due to the fact the it considers the similarity between queries. The SME produces a quite close-to-best result, but the SMKL tends not to be a good choice for the joint classification model. On TREC4, SMKL is comparable with independent model, but it is worse than SMQE and SME.
Figure 2 shows the results of DIGLIB at source level. In this case, both SMQE and SME are comparable, except for the precision at top 1. Again SMKL is not a good choice.

Figure 1: Document Level High Precision on TREC123 & TREC4 with Different Similarity Metrics

Precision

DIGLIB

0.65

SMQE

SME

Independent

0.6

SMKL

0.55

0.5

0.45

0.4

0.35

0

2

4

6

8

10

Source Rank

7. CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK
This paper proposes a novel joint probabilistic classification model for the resource selection task in federated text search. Existing resource selection algorithms only utilize evidence of individual information sources to select relevant sources, but they do not model the valuable relationship information between the sources. The proposed algorithm estimates the probability of relevance of information sources in a joint manner by combining both the evidence of individual sources and the relationship between the sources. The importance of different types of evidence is determined in a discriminative manner for maximizing the accuracy of resource selection with some training queries. Different types of similarity metrics have been explored to model source similarity based on the performance of available sources on training queries and the Kullback-Leibler divergence on the contents of the sources. A set of experiments were conducted with two TREC datasets and one real world application with digital libraries. The empirical results in different configurations have demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed joint classification model.
There are several directions to extend the research work in the paper. First, one advantage of the proposed joint probabilistic model is to integrate different types of evidence of

Figure 2: Source Level Accuracy on DIGLIB with
Different Similarity Metrics
individual sources and their relationship. We plan to explore more features for improving the performance of resource selection. For example, we can combine multiple types of similarity evidence in a single framework (with different  weights), which may better model sources' relationship for more accurate resource selection. Second, the joint model in this paper utilizes a reranking approach in resource selection with a small set of information sources (e.g., top 10) to avoid large computational complexity. It is possible to break this limit by utilizing some other approximate inference algorithms (e.g., the pseudo likelihood approach [15]) or making further assumptions on the sources' relationship. For example, one strategy is to first divide available sources into groups of closely related sources. Inference can be conducted by building a small model in each group and assuming independence of sources between different groups.
8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was partially supported by the Vietnam Education Foundation (VEF) and the NSF grant IIS-0749462.

104

The opinions, findings, and conclusions stated herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the sponsors.
9. REFERENCES
[1] J. Arguello, J. Callan, and F. Diaz. Classification-based resource selection. Proceeding of
the 18th ACM Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, 2009. [2] J. Arguello, F. D´iaz, J. Callan, and J. Crespo. Sources of evidence for vertical selection. In Proceedings of the
32nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. ACM, 2009. [3] J. Callan. Distributed information retrieval. Advances in Information Retrieval, pages 127­150, 2000. [4] J. Callan and M. Connell. Query-based sampling of text databases. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, 19(2):97­130, 2001. [5] J. Callan, W. B. Croft, and S. M. Harding. The inquery retrieval system. In Proceedings of the Third
International Conference on Database and Expert Systems Applications, 1992. [6] J. Callan, Z. Lu, and W. B. Croft. Searching distributed collection with inference networks. In
Proceedings of the 18th Annual International ACM
SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, 1995. [7] S. Cetintas, L. Si, and H. Yuan. Learning from past queries for resource selection. In Proceeding of the 18th
ACM Conference on Information and Knowledge Management. ACM, 2009. [8] N. Craswell, P. Bailey, and D. Hawking. Server selection on the world wide web. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM Conference on Digital Libraries. ACM, 2000. [9] N. Fuhr. A decision-theoretic approach to database selection in networked ir. ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS), 17(3):229­249, 1999. [10] N. Fuhr. Resource discovery in distributed digital libraries. In In Digital Libraries '99: Advanced Methods and Technologies, Digital Collections, 1999. [11] L. Gravano, K. Chang, C-C., H. Garc´ia-Molina, and A. Paepcke. Starts: Stanford proposal for internet meta-searching. In Proceedings of the ACM-SIGMOD
International Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD). ACM, 1997. [12] L. Gravano, H. Garc´ia-Molina, and A. Tomasic. Gloss: Text-source discovery over the internet. ACM Transactions on Database Systems, 24(2):229­264, 1999. [13] W. Meng, C. Yu, and K. Liu. Building efficient and effective metasearch engines. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 34(1):48­89, 2002. [14] D. Metzler and W. Croft. Combining the language model and inference network approaches to retrieval. Information Processing and Management, 40(5):735­750, 2004. [15] S. Parise and M. Welling. Learning in markov random fields: An empirical study. In Joint Statistical Meeting (JSM2005), volume 4, 2005. [16] J. M. Ponte and W. B. Croft. A language modeling approach to information retrieval. In Proceedings of

the 25th Annual International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. ACM, 1998. [17] J. Seo and W. B. Croft. Blog site search using resource selection. In CIKM '08: Proceeding of the
17th ACM Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, pages 1053­1062, New York, NY, USA, 2008. ACM. [18] M. Shokouhi. Central-rank-based collection selection in uncooperative distributed information retrieval. In
Proceedings of the 29th European Conference on Information Retrieval, 2007. [19] M. Shokouhi and J. Zobel. Robust result merging using sample-based score estimates. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, 27(3):1­29, 2009. [20] L. Si and J. Callan. Relevant document distribution estimation method for resource selection. In
Proceedings of the 26th Annual International ACM
SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. ACM, 2003. [21] L. Si and J. Callan. A semi-supervised learning method to merge search engine results. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, 21(4):457­491, 2003. [22] L. Si and J. Callan. Unified utility maximization framework for resource selection. In Proceedings of
13th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM), 2004. [23] L. Si and J. Callan. Modeling search engine effectiveness for federated search. In Proceedings of the
28th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. ACM, 2005. [24] P. Thomas and M. Shokouhi. Sushi: scoring scaled samples for server selection. In SIGIR '09: Proceedings
of the 32nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. ACM, 2009. [25] E. Voorhees, N. K. Gupta, and B. Johnson-Laird. Learning collection fusion strategies. In Proceedings of
the 18th Annual International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. ACM, 1995. [26] J. Xu and J. Callan. Effective retrieval with distributed collections. In Proceedings of the 21st
Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. ACM, 1998. [27] J. Xu and W. B. Croft. Cluster-based language models for distributed retrieval. In Proceedings of the 22nd
Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. ACM, 1999. [28] B. Yuwono and D. L. Lee. Server ranking for distributed text retrieval systems on the internet. In
Proceedings of the 5th Annual International
Conference on Database Systems for Advanced Applications, 1997.

105


C:\Users\z3696\Documents\Document-Classification\classifier\Sampling_Raw1.py:100: FutureWarning: The frame.append method is deprecated and will be removed from pandas in a future version. Use pandas.concat instead.
  df = df.append(pos_df)
C:\Users\z3696\Documents\Document-Classification\classifier\Sampling_Raw1.py:101: FutureWarning: The frame.append method is deprecated and will be removed from pandas in a future version. Use pandas.concat instead.
  df = df.append(neg_df)
                                                sentence  label
0      The Importance of Anchor Text for Ad Hoc Searc...      1
1                                                             1
2                           Marijn Koolen1 Jaap Kamps1,2      1
3      1 Archives and Information Studies, University...      1
4                            {m.h.a.koolen,kamps}@uva.nl      1
...                                                  ...    ...
48516  Jacques Savoy University of Neuchatel Africa &...      0
48517                                                         0
48518                                                 iv      0
48519                                                         0
48520                                                         0

[78229 rows x 2 columns]
(29708, 2)
(48521, 2)
[nltk_data] Downloading package wordnet to
[nltk_data]     C:\Users\z3696\AppData\Roaming\nltk_data...
[nltk_data]   Package wordnet is already up-to-date!
[nltk_data] Downloading package stopwords to
[nltk_data]     C:\Users\z3696\AppData\Roaming\nltk_data...
[nltk_data]   Package stopwords is already up-to-date!
DF1: 31193
DF2: 34164
DF3: 37135
DF4: 40106
DF5: 40056
DF6: 38173
DF7: 36292
DF8: 34411
DF9: 32530
DF10: 30649
15596
17082
18568
20053
20028
19086
18146
17206
16265
15324
X1: (15596,)
X2: (15596,)
X3: (17082,)
X4: (17082,)
X5: (18568,)
X6: (18568,)
X7: (20053,)
X8: (20053,)
X9: (20028,)
X10: (20028,)
Y1: (15596,)
Y2: (15596,)
Y3: (17082,)
Y4: (17082,)
Y5: (18568,)
Y6: (18568,)
Y7: (20053,)
Y8: (20053,)
Y9: (15596,)
Y10: (15596,)
(15596, 64713)
(15596, 64713)
C:\toolkits.win\anaconda3\envs\dlwin\lib\site-packages\seaborn\_decorators.py:36: FutureWarning: Pass the following variable as a keyword arg: x. From version 0.12, the only valid positional argument will be `data`, and passing other arguments without an explicit keyword will result in an error or misinterpretation.
  warnings.warn(
Label Negative: (48521, 6)
Label Positive: (29708, 6)
total class of pos and neg : 0    29708
1    29708
Name: label, dtype: int64
total class of pos and neg: 0    29708
1    29708
Name: label, dtype: int64
(78229, 28550)
(78229,)
Original dataset shape: Counter({0: 48521, 1: 29708})
Resample dataset shape Counter({0: 29708, 1: 29708})
Original dataset shape Counter({0: 48521, 1: 29708})
Resample dataset shape Counter({0: 29708, 1: 29708})
Original dataset shape Counter({0: 48521, 1: 29708})
Resample dataset shape Counter({1: 48521, 0: 48521})
Original dataset shape Counter({0: 48521, 1: 29708})
Resample dataset shape Counter({1: 48521, 0: 48521})
Original dataset shape Counter({0: 48521, 1: 29708})
Resample dataset shape Counter({1: 48521, 0: 48521})
Original dataset shape: Counter({0: 48521, 1: 29708})
Resample dataset shape: Counter({0: 29708, 1: 29708})
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.1
Logistic F1-score 43.9119804400978
Logistic ROCAUC score: 60.70235137291886
Logistic Recall score: 30.94417643004824
Logistic Precision Score: 75.58922558922558
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[1375  145]
 [1002  449]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.58      0.90      0.71      1520
           1       0.76      0.31      0.44      1451

    accuracy                           0.61      2971
   macro avg       0.67      0.61      0.57      2971
weighted avg       0.67      0.61      0.58      2971


Logistic Accuracy Score 61.39347021204982
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.201460599899292 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.1
DCT F1-score 37.76513191929644
DCT ROCAUC score: 58.72884852551778
DCT Recall score: 25.155065472088218
DCT Precision Score: 75.72614107883817
DCT Confusion Matrix [[1403  117]
 [1086  365]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.92      0.70      1520
           1       0.76      0.25      0.38      1451

    accuracy                           0.60      2971
   macro avg       0.66      0.59      0.54      2971
weighted avg       0.66      0.60      0.54      2971


DCT Accuracy Score 59.50858296869741
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  0.4677848815917969 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.1
Naive F1-score 46.546830652790916
Naive ROCAUC score: 61.328824948311514
Naive Recall score: 33.90764989662302
Naive Precision Score: 74.2081447963801
Naive Confusion Matrix [[1349  171]
 [ 959  492]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.58      0.89      0.70      1520
           1       0.74      0.34      0.47      1451

    accuracy                           0.62      2971
   macro avg       0.66      0.61      0.59      2971
weighted avg       0.66      0.62      0.59      2971


Naive Accuracy Score 61.96566812521037
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.007978439331054688 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.1
XGB F1-Score 35.04823151125402
XGB ROCAUC Score: 67.41010992326113
XGB Recall score: 78.79518072289157
XGB Precision Score: 22.53618194348725
XGB Confusion Matrix [[1432 1124]
 [  88  327]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.94      0.56      0.70      2556
           1       0.23      0.79      0.35       415

    accuracy                           0.59      2971
   macro avg       0.58      0.67      0.53      2971
weighted avg       0.84      0.59      0.65      2971


XGB Accuracy Score 61.96566812521037
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.9270892143249512 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.1
RFC F1 score 41.579210394802594
RFC ROCAUC Score: 59.92704668286844
RFC Recall score: 75.63636363636364
RFC Precision Score: 28.669882839421092
RFC Confusion Matrix [[1386  134]
 [1035  416]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.91      0.70      1520
           1       0.76      0.29      0.42      1451

    accuracy                           0.61      2971
   macro avg       0.66      0.60      0.56      2971
weighted avg       0.66      0.61      0.56      2971


RFC Accuracy Score 60.652978795018505
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  231.47048473358154 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam Test-Size 0.05 : [array([0.45746671, 0.61388183, 0.45746671, ..., 0.49184446, 0.45746671,
       0.45746671])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam Test-Size: 0.05 : [0.43911980440097803]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.05 : [0.6070235137291886]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.05 : [0.3094417643004824]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.05 : [0.7558922558922558]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.05 : [0.6139347021204982]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.05 : [array([0.39404323, 1.        , 0.39404323, ..., 0.        , 0.39404323,
       0.39404323])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.05 : [0.37765131919296435]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.05 : [0.5872884852551779]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.05 : [0.25155065472088217]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.05 : [0.7572614107883817]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.05 : [0.5950858296869741]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.05 : [array([0.49924255, 0.67448338, 0.49924255, ..., 0.49237253, 0.49924255,
       0.48140508])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.05 : [0.46546830652790916]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.05 : [0.6132882494831151]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.05 : [0.3390764989662302]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.05 : [0.7420814479638009]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.05 : [0.6196566812521037]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.05 : [array([0.45381084, 0.8939553 , 0.45381084, ..., 0.43761998, 0.45381084,
       0.45381084], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.05 : [0.35048231511254024]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.05 : [0.6741010992326113]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.05 : [0.7879518072289157]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.05 : [0.2253618194348725]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.05 : [0.5920565466173006]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.05 : [array([0.39425351, 0.85829997, 0.39425351, ..., 0.39927919, 0.39425351,
       0.39425351])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.05 : [0.41579210394802596]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.05 : [0.5992704668286845]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.05 : [0.7563636363636363]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.05 : [0.2866988283942109]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.05 : [0.6065297879501851]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.2
Logistic F1-score 42.51069900142653
Logistic ROCAUC score: 60.104193307902854
Logistic Recall score: 29.330708661417322
Logistic Precision Score: 77.2020725388601
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[1315  132]
 [1077  447]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.55      0.91      0.69      1447
           1       0.77      0.29      0.43      1524

    accuracy                           0.59      2971
   macro avg       0.66      0.60      0.56      2971
weighted avg       0.66      0.59      0.55      2971


Logistic Accuracy Score 59.30663076405251
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.31615376472473145 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.2
DCT F1-score 40.039447731755416
DCT ROCAUC score: 59.93389345682169
DCT Recall score: 26.64041994750656
DCT Precision Score: 80.55555555555556
DCT Confusion Matrix [[1349   98]
 [1118  406]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.55      0.93      0.69      1447
           1       0.81      0.27      0.40      1524

    accuracy                           0.59      2971
   macro avg       0.68      0.60      0.54      2971
weighted avg       0.68      0.59      0.54      2971


DCT Accuracy Score 59.071019858633456
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  0.9814074039459229 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.2
Naive F1-score 45.9927140255009
Naive ROCAUC score: 60.797681690963465
Naive Recall score: 33.13648293963254
Naive Precision Score: 75.14880952380952
Naive Confusion Matrix [[1280  167]
 [1019  505]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.88      0.68      1447
           1       0.75      0.33      0.46      1524

    accuracy                           0.60      2971
   macro avg       0.65      0.61      0.57      2971
weighted avg       0.66      0.60      0.57      2971


Naive Accuracy Score 60.08078088185796
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.010006189346313477 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.2
XGB F1-Score 34.78260869565217
XGB ROCAUC Score: 68.00050492299924
XGB Recall score: 82.35294117647058
XGB Precision Score: 22.04724409448819
XGB Confusion Matrix [[1375 1188]
 [  72  336]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.54      0.69      2563
           1       0.22      0.82      0.35       408

    accuracy                           0.58      2971
   macro avg       0.59      0.68      0.52      2971
weighted avg       0.85      0.58      0.64      2971


XGB Accuracy Score 60.08078088185796
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.6133565902709961 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.2
RFC F1 score 42.43879020643303
RFC ROCAUC Score: 60.45846506574377
RFC Recall score: 79.06976744186046
RFC Precision Score: 29.00262467191601
RFC Confusion Matrix [[1330  117]
 [1082  442]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.55      0.92      0.69      1447
           1       0.79      0.29      0.42      1524

    accuracy                           0.60      2971
   macro avg       0.67      0.60      0.56      2971
weighted avg       0.67      0.60      0.55      2971


RFC Accuracy Score 59.64321777179401
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  608.258950471878 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam Test-Size 0.05 : [array([0.45746671, 0.61388183, 0.45746671, ..., 0.49184446, 0.45746671,
       0.45746671]), array([0.43918837, 0.43918837, 0.57781899, ..., 0.4248311 , 0.43918837,
       0.43918837])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam Test-Size: 0.05 : [0.43911980440097803, 0.4251069900142653]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.05 : [0.6070235137291886, 0.6010419330790285]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.05 : [0.3094417643004824, 0.2933070866141732]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.05 : [0.7558922558922558, 0.772020725388601]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.05 : [0.6139347021204982, 0.593066307640525]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.05 : [array([0.39404323, 1.        , 0.39404323, ..., 0.        , 0.39404323,
       0.39404323]), array([0.38262942, 0.38262942, 1.        , ..., 0.38888889, 0.38262942,
       0.38262942])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.05 : [0.37765131919296435, 0.4003944773175542]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.05 : [0.5872884852551779, 0.599338934568217]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.05 : [0.25155065472088217, 0.2664041994750656]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.05 : [0.7572614107883817, 0.8055555555555556]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.05 : [0.5950858296869741, 0.5907101985863346]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.05 : [array([0.49924255, 0.67448338, 0.49924255, ..., 0.49237253, 0.49924255,
       0.48140508]), array([0.49019608, 0.49019608, 0.61065025, ..., 0.40372282, 0.49019608,
       0.49019608])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.05 : [0.46546830652790916, 0.459927140255009]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.05 : [0.6132882494831151, 0.6079768169096347]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.05 : [0.3390764989662302, 0.33136482939632544]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.05 : [0.7420814479638009, 0.7514880952380952]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.05 : [0.6196566812521037, 0.6008078088185796]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.05 : [array([0.45381084, 0.8939553 , 0.45381084, ..., 0.43761998, 0.45381084,
       0.45381084], dtype=float32), array([0.43980885, 0.43980885, 0.444633  , ..., 0.43980885, 0.43980885,
       0.43980885], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.05 : [0.35048231511254024, 0.34782608695652173]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.05 : [0.6741010992326113, 0.6800050492299924]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.05 : [0.7879518072289157, 0.8235294117647058]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.05 : [0.2253618194348725, 0.2204724409448819]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.05 : [0.5920565466173006, 0.5759003702457085]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.05 : [array([0.39425351, 0.85829997, 0.39425351, ..., 0.39927919, 0.39425351,
       0.39425351]), array([0.38265151, 0.38265151, 0.6512363 , ..., 0.38835561, 0.38265151,
       0.38265151])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.05 : [0.41579210394802596, 0.4243879020643303]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.05 : [0.5992704668286845, 0.6045846506574377]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.05 : [0.7563636363636363, 0.7906976744186046]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.05 : [0.2866988283942109, 0.2900262467191601]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.05 : [0.6065297879501851, 0.5964321777179401]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.3
Logistic F1-score 46.28490298154283
Logistic ROCAUC score: 61.634146606738405
Logistic Recall score: 33.10765064319567
Logistic Precision Score: 76.88679245283019
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[1347  147]
 [ 988  489]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.58      0.90      0.70      1494
           1       0.77      0.33      0.46      1477

    accuracy                           0.62      2971
   macro avg       0.67      0.62      0.58      2971
weighted avg       0.67      0.62      0.58      2971


Logistic Accuracy Score 61.79737462133962
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.21043825149536133 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.3
DCT F1-score 42.073778664007975
DCT ROCAUC score: 60.70472365653088
DCT Recall score: 28.57142857142857
DCT Precision Score: 79.77315689981096
DCT Confusion Matrix [[1387  107]
 [1055  422]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.93      0.70      1494
           1       0.80      0.29      0.42      1477

    accuracy                           0.61      2971
   macro avg       0.68      0.61      0.56      2971
weighted avg       0.68      0.61      0.56      2971


DCT Accuracy Score 60.88858970043757
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  1.5318994522094727 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.3
Naive F1-score 62.56790123456789
Naive ROCAUC score: 49.182829263340885
Naive Recall score: 85.78199052132702
Naive Precision Score: 49.24212980956082
Naive Confusion Matrix [[ 188 1306]
 [ 210 1267]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.47      0.13      0.20      1494
           1       0.49      0.86      0.63      1477

    accuracy                           0.49      2971
   macro avg       0.48      0.49      0.41      2971
weighted avg       0.48      0.49      0.41      2971


Naive Accuracy Score 48.97340962638842
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.009973526000976562 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.3
XGB F1-Score 38.21522309711286
XGB ROCAUC Score: 70.63976244115237
XGB Recall score: 85.04672897196261
XGB Precision Score: 24.644549763033176
XGB Confusion Matrix [[1430 1113]
 [  64  364]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.96      0.56      0.71      2543
           1       0.25      0.85      0.38       428

    accuracy                           0.60      2971
   macro avg       0.60      0.71      0.55      2971
weighted avg       0.85      0.60      0.66      2971


XGB Accuracy Score 48.97340962638842
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.6881585121154785 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.3
RFC F1 score 45.65112926477654
RFC ROCAUC Score: 61.76262259600351
RFC Recall score: 78.64238410596026
RFC Precision Score: 32.159783344617466
RFC Confusion Matrix [[1365  129]
 [1002  475]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.58      0.91      0.71      1494
           1       0.79      0.32      0.46      1477

    accuracy                           0.62      2971
   macro avg       0.68      0.62      0.58      2971
weighted avg       0.68      0.62      0.58      2971


RFC Accuracy Score 61.93200942443622
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  1006.1759479045868 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam Test-Size 0.05 : [array([0.45746671, 0.61388183, 0.45746671, ..., 0.49184446, 0.45746671,
       0.45746671]), array([0.43918837, 0.43918837, 0.57781899, ..., 0.4248311 , 0.43918837,
       0.43918837]), array([0.45152486, 0.45152486, 0.45152486, ..., 0.45152486, 0.45152486,
       0.45152486])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam Test-Size: 0.05 : [0.43911980440097803, 0.4251069900142653, 0.4628490298154283]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.05 : [0.6070235137291886, 0.6010419330790285, 0.616341466067384]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.05 : [0.3094417643004824, 0.2933070866141732, 0.3310765064319567]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.05 : [0.7558922558922558, 0.772020725388601, 0.7688679245283019]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.05 : [0.6139347021204982, 0.593066307640525, 0.6179737462133962]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.05 : [array([0.39404323, 1.        , 0.39404323, ..., 0.        , 0.39404323,
       0.39404323]), array([0.38262942, 0.38262942, 1.        , ..., 0.38888889, 0.38262942,
       0.38262942]), array([0.40149714, 0.40149714, 0.40149714, ..., 0.40149714, 0.40149714,
       0.40149714])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.05 : [0.37765131919296435, 0.4003944773175542, 0.4207377866400797]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.05 : [0.5872884852551779, 0.599338934568217, 0.6070472365653088]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.05 : [0.25155065472088217, 0.2664041994750656, 0.2857142857142857]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.05 : [0.7572614107883817, 0.8055555555555556, 0.7977315689981096]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.05 : [0.5950858296869741, 0.5907101985863346, 0.6088858970043757]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.05 : [array([0.49924255, 0.67448338, 0.49924255, ..., 0.49237253, 0.49924255,
       0.48140508]), array([0.49019608, 0.49019608, 0.61065025, ..., 0.40372282, 0.49019608,
       0.49019608]), array([0.4562111 , 0.50482496, 0.4562111 , ..., 0.50482496, 0.50482496,
       0.50482496])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.05 : [0.46546830652790916, 0.459927140255009, 0.6256790123456789]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.05 : [0.6132882494831151, 0.6079768169096347, 0.4918282926334088]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.05 : [0.3390764989662302, 0.33136482939632544, 0.8578199052132701]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.05 : [0.7420814479638009, 0.7514880952380952, 0.49242129809560825]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.05 : [0.6196566812521037, 0.6008078088185796, 0.4897340962638842]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.05 : [array([0.45381084, 0.8939553 , 0.45381084, ..., 0.43761998, 0.45381084,
       0.45381084], dtype=float32), array([0.43980885, 0.43980885, 0.444633  , ..., 0.43980885, 0.43980885,
       0.43980885], dtype=float32), array([0.45617354, 0.45617354, 0.45617354, ..., 0.45617354, 0.45617354,
       0.45617354], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.05 : [0.35048231511254024, 0.34782608695652173, 0.3821522309711286]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.05 : [0.6741010992326113, 0.6800050492299924, 0.7063976244115237]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.05 : [0.7879518072289157, 0.8235294117647058, 0.8504672897196262]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.05 : [0.2253618194348725, 0.2204724409448819, 0.24644549763033174]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.05 : [0.5920565466173006, 0.5759003702457085, 0.6038370918882531]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.05 : [array([0.39425351, 0.85829997, 0.39425351, ..., 0.39927919, 0.39425351,
       0.39425351]), array([0.38265151, 0.38265151, 0.6512363 , ..., 0.38835561, 0.38265151,
       0.38265151]), array([0.40143408, 0.40143408, 0.40143408, ..., 0.40143408, 0.40143408,
       0.40143408])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.05 : [0.41579210394802596, 0.4243879020643303, 0.4565112926477654]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.05 : [0.5992704668286845, 0.6045846506574377, 0.6176262259600351]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.05 : [0.7563636363636363, 0.7906976744186046, 0.7864238410596026]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.05 : [0.2866988283942109, 0.2900262467191601, 0.32159783344617465]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.05 : [0.6065297879501851, 0.5964321777179401, 0.6193200942443622]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.4
Logistic F1-score 46.69440591770689
Logistic ROCAUC score: 61.443747824636716
Logistic Recall score: 33.689126084056035
Logistic Precision Score: 76.05421686746988
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[1313  159]
 [ 994  505]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.89      0.69      1472
           1       0.76      0.34      0.47      1499

    accuracy                           0.61      2971
   macro avg       0.66      0.61      0.58      2971
weighted avg       0.67      0.61      0.58      2971


Logistic Accuracy Score 61.19151800740491
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.4388253688812256 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.4
DCT F1-score 41.81729360039081
DCT ROCAUC score: 60.20009716622676
DCT Recall score: 28.552368245497
DCT Precision Score: 78.1021897810219
DCT Confusion Matrix [[1352  120]
 [1071  428]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.92      0.69      1472
           1       0.78      0.29      0.42      1499

    accuracy                           0.60      2971
   macro avg       0.67      0.60      0.56      2971
weighted avg       0.67      0.60      0.55      2971


DCT Accuracy Score 59.91248737798721
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  2.072489023208618 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.4
Naive F1-score 63.23781533186382
Naive ROCAUC score: 49.14220440438553
Naive Recall score: 86.12408272181455
Naive Precision Score: 49.961300309597526
Naive Confusion Matrix [[ 179 1293]
 [ 208 1291]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.46      0.12      0.19      1472
           1       0.50      0.86      0.63      1499

    accuracy                           0.49      2971
   macro avg       0.48      0.49      0.41      2971
weighted avg       0.48      0.49      0.41      2971


Naive Accuracy Score 49.47829013800067
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.008975505828857422 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.4
XGB F1-Score 37.31958762886598
XGB ROCAUC Score: 68.57272816900145
XGB Recall score: 82.08616780045351
XGB Precision Score: 24.149432955303535
XGB Confusion Matrix [[1393 1137]
 [  79  362]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.55      0.70      2530
           1       0.24      0.82      0.37       441

    accuracy                           0.59      2971
   macro avg       0.59      0.69      0.53      2971
weighted avg       0.84      0.59      0.65      2971


XGB Accuracy Score 49.47829013800067
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.7888882160186768 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.4
RFC F1 score 45.944678856071256
RFC ROCAUC Score: 61.452925138498124
RFC Recall score: 77.28706624605678
RFC Precision Score: 32.688458972648434
RFC Confusion Matrix [[1328  144]
 [1009  490]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.90      0.70      1472
           1       0.77      0.33      0.46      1499

    accuracy                           0.61      2971
   macro avg       0.67      0.61      0.58      2971
weighted avg       0.67      0.61      0.58      2971


RFC Accuracy Score 61.19151800740491
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  1384.9420454502106 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam Test-Size 0.05 : [array([0.45746671, 0.61388183, 0.45746671, ..., 0.49184446, 0.45746671,
       0.45746671]), array([0.43918837, 0.43918837, 0.57781899, ..., 0.4248311 , 0.43918837,
       0.43918837]), array([0.45152486, 0.45152486, 0.45152486, ..., 0.45152486, 0.45152486,
       0.45152486]), array([0.44543183, 0.5561533 , 0.20999763, ..., 0.44543183, 0.44543183,
       0.44543183])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam Test-Size: 0.05 : [0.43911980440097803, 0.4251069900142653, 0.4628490298154283, 0.4669440591770689]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.05 : [0.6070235137291886, 0.6010419330790285, 0.616341466067384, 0.6144374782463672]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.05 : [0.3094417643004824, 0.2933070866141732, 0.3310765064319567, 0.33689126084056037]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.05 : [0.7558922558922558, 0.772020725388601, 0.7688679245283019, 0.7605421686746988]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.05 : [0.6139347021204982, 0.593066307640525, 0.6179737462133962, 0.6119151800740491]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.05 : [array([0.39404323, 1.        , 0.39404323, ..., 0.        , 0.39404323,
       0.39404323]), array([0.38262942, 0.38262942, 1.        , ..., 0.38888889, 0.38262942,
       0.38262942]), array([0.40149714, 0.40149714, 0.40149714, ..., 0.40149714, 0.40149714,
       0.40149714]), array([0.39673224, 1.        , 0.13333333, ..., 0.39673224, 0.39673224,
       0.39673224])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.05 : [0.37765131919296435, 0.4003944773175542, 0.4207377866400797, 0.41817293600390815]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.05 : [0.5872884852551779, 0.599338934568217, 0.6070472365653088, 0.6020009716622676]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.05 : [0.25155065472088217, 0.2664041994750656, 0.2857142857142857, 0.28552368245497]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.05 : [0.7572614107883817, 0.8055555555555556, 0.7977315689981096, 0.781021897810219]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.05 : [0.5950858296869741, 0.5907101985863346, 0.6088858970043757, 0.5991248737798721]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.05 : [array([0.49924255, 0.67448338, 0.49924255, ..., 0.49237253, 0.49924255,
       0.48140508]), array([0.49019608, 0.49019608, 0.61065025, ..., 0.40372282, 0.49019608,
       0.49019608]), array([0.4562111 , 0.50482496, 0.4562111 , ..., 0.50482496, 0.50482496,
       0.50482496]), array([0.50063115, 0.61403899, 0.15938963, ..., 0.50063115, 0.50063115,
       0.50063115])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.05 : [0.46546830652790916, 0.459927140255009, 0.6256790123456789, 0.6323781533186382]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.05 : [0.6132882494831151, 0.6079768169096347, 0.4918282926334088, 0.4914220440438553]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.05 : [0.3390764989662302, 0.33136482939632544, 0.8578199052132701, 0.8612408272181454]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.05 : [0.7420814479638009, 0.7514880952380952, 0.49242129809560825, 0.4996130030959752]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.05 : [0.6196566812521037, 0.6008078088185796, 0.4897340962638842, 0.49478290138000675]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.05 : [array([0.45381084, 0.8939553 , 0.45381084, ..., 0.43761998, 0.45381084,
       0.45381084], dtype=float32), array([0.43980885, 0.43980885, 0.444633  , ..., 0.43980885, 0.43980885,
       0.43980885], dtype=float32), array([0.45617354, 0.45617354, 0.45617354, ..., 0.45617354, 0.45617354,
       0.45617354], dtype=float32), array([0.4537837, 0.4537837, 0.3223761, ..., 0.4537837, 0.4537837,
       0.4537837], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.05 : [0.35048231511254024, 0.34782608695652173, 0.3821522309711286, 0.3731958762886598]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.05 : [0.6741010992326113, 0.6800050492299924, 0.7063976244115237, 0.6857272816900145]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.05 : [0.7879518072289157, 0.8235294117647058, 0.8504672897196262, 0.8208616780045351]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.05 : [0.2253618194348725, 0.2204724409448819, 0.24644549763033174, 0.24149432955303535]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.05 : [0.5920565466173006, 0.5759003702457085, 0.6038370918882531, 0.5907101985863346]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.05 : [array([0.39425351, 0.85829997, 0.39425351, ..., 0.39927919, 0.39425351,
       0.39425351]), array([0.38265151, 0.38265151, 0.6512363 , ..., 0.38835561, 0.38265151,
       0.38265151]), array([0.40143408, 0.40143408, 0.40143408, ..., 0.40143408, 0.40143408,
       0.40143408]), array([0.39678708, 0.77029842, 0.13691107, ..., 0.39678708, 0.39678708,
       0.39678708])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.05 : [0.41579210394802596, 0.4243879020643303, 0.4565112926477654, 0.4594467885607126]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.05 : [0.5992704668286845, 0.6045846506574377, 0.6176262259600351, 0.6145292513849813]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.05 : [0.7563636363636363, 0.7906976744186046, 0.7864238410596026, 0.7728706624605678]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.05 : [0.2866988283942109, 0.2900262467191601, 0.32159783344617465, 0.3268845897264843]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.05 : [0.6065297879501851, 0.5964321777179401, 0.6193200942443622, 0.6119151800740491]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.5
Logistic F1-score 48.007501172058134
Logistic ROCAUC score: 62.29511986184952
Logistic Recall score: 34.948805460750854
Logistic Precision Score: 76.64670658682635
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[1350  156]
 [ 953  512]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.59      0.90      0.71      1506
           1       0.77      0.35      0.48      1465

    accuracy                           0.63      2971
   macro avg       0.68      0.62      0.59      2971
weighted avg       0.68      0.63      0.60      2971


Logistic Accuracy Score 62.67250084146752
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.21639561653137207 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.5
DCT F1-score 44.411908247925815
DCT ROCAUC score: 61.246141713011426
DCT Recall score: 31.058020477815703
DCT Precision Score: 77.91095890410958
DCT Confusion Matrix [[1377  129]
 [1010  455]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.58      0.91      0.71      1506
           1       0.78      0.31      0.44      1465

    accuracy                           0.62      2971
   macro avg       0.68      0.61      0.58      2971
weighted avg       0.68      0.62      0.58      2971


DCT Accuracy Score 61.66273981824302
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  2.5591511726379395 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.5
Naive F1-score 62.42888943853573
Naive ROCAUC score: 49.379773284563676
Naive Recall score: 86.1433447098976
Naive Precision Score: 48.95267649340574
Naive Confusion Matrix [[ 190 1316]
 [ 203 1262]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.48      0.13      0.20      1506
           1       0.49      0.86      0.62      1465

    accuracy                           0.49      2971
   macro avg       0.49      0.49      0.41      2971
weighted avg       0.49      0.49      0.41      2971


Naive Accuracy Score 48.872433524065976
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.010970592498779297 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.5
XGB F1-Score 40.2457757296467
XGB ROCAUC Score: 68.67960326944534
XGB Recall score: 80.5327868852459
XGB Precision Score: 26.825938566552903
XGB Confusion Matrix [[1411 1072]
 [  95  393]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.94      0.57      0.71      2483
           1       0.27      0.81      0.40       488

    accuracy                           0.61      2971
   macro avg       0.60      0.69      0.55      2971
weighted avg       0.83      0.61      0.66      2971


XGB Accuracy Score 48.872433524065976
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.9255218505859375 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.05 0.5
RFC F1 score 47.965941343424795
RFC ROCAUC Score: 62.5892788346047
RFC Recall score: 78.12018489984591
RFC Precision Score: 34.60750853242321
RFC Confusion Matrix [[1364  142]
 [ 958  507]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.59      0.91      0.71      1506
           1       0.78      0.35      0.48      1465

    accuracy                           0.63      2971
   macro avg       0.68      0.63      0.60      2971
weighted avg       0.68      0.63      0.60      2971


RFC Accuracy Score 62.97542914843487
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  1810.6826269626617 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam Test-Size 0.05 : [array([0.45746671, 0.61388183, 0.45746671, ..., 0.49184446, 0.45746671,
       0.45746671]), array([0.43918837, 0.43918837, 0.57781899, ..., 0.4248311 , 0.43918837,
       0.43918837]), array([0.45152486, 0.45152486, 0.45152486, ..., 0.45152486, 0.45152486,
       0.45152486]), array([0.44543183, 0.5561533 , 0.20999763, ..., 0.44543183, 0.44543183,
       0.44543183]), array([0.44487661, 0.44487661, 0.44487661, ..., 0.21474521, 0.44487661,
       0.44487661])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam Test-Size: 0.05 : [0.43911980440097803, 0.4251069900142653, 0.4628490298154283, 0.4669440591770689, 0.48007501172058137]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.05 : [0.6070235137291886, 0.6010419330790285, 0.616341466067384, 0.6144374782463672, 0.6229511986184952]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.05 : [0.3094417643004824, 0.2933070866141732, 0.3310765064319567, 0.33689126084056037, 0.34948805460750854]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.05 : [0.7558922558922558, 0.772020725388601, 0.7688679245283019, 0.7605421686746988, 0.7664670658682635]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.05 : [0.6139347021204982, 0.593066307640525, 0.6179737462133962, 0.6119151800740491, 0.6267250084146752]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.05 : [array([0.39404323, 1.        , 0.39404323, ..., 0.        , 0.39404323,
       0.39404323]), array([0.38262942, 0.38262942, 1.        , ..., 0.38888889, 0.38262942,
       0.38262942]), array([0.40149714, 0.40149714, 0.40149714, ..., 0.40149714, 0.40149714,
       0.40149714]), array([0.39673224, 1.        , 0.13333333, ..., 0.39673224, 0.39673224,
       0.39673224]), array([0.39934116, 0.39934116, 0.39934116, ..., 0.        , 0.39934116,
       0.39934116])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.05 : [0.37765131919296435, 0.4003944773175542, 0.4207377866400797, 0.41817293600390815, 0.4441190824792582]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.05 : [0.5872884852551779, 0.599338934568217, 0.6070472365653088, 0.6020009716622676, 0.6124614171301143]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.05 : [0.25155065472088217, 0.2664041994750656, 0.2857142857142857, 0.28552368245497, 0.310580204778157]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.05 : [0.7572614107883817, 0.8055555555555556, 0.7977315689981096, 0.781021897810219, 0.7791095890410958]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.05 : [0.5950858296869741, 0.5907101985863346, 0.6088858970043757, 0.5991248737798721, 0.6166273981824302]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.05 : [array([0.49924255, 0.67448338, 0.49924255, ..., 0.49237253, 0.49924255,
       0.48140508]), array([0.49019608, 0.49019608, 0.61065025, ..., 0.40372282, 0.49019608,
       0.49019608]), array([0.4562111 , 0.50482496, 0.4562111 , ..., 0.50482496, 0.50482496,
       0.50482496]), array([0.50063115, 0.61403899, 0.15938963, ..., 0.50063115, 0.50063115,
       0.50063115]), array([0.50323145, 0.50323145, 0.50323145, ..., 0.1138651 , 0.50323145,
       0.50323145])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.05 : [0.46546830652790916, 0.459927140255009, 0.6256790123456789, 0.6323781533186382, 0.6242888943853573]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.05 : [0.6132882494831151, 0.6079768169096347, 0.4918282926334088, 0.4914220440438553, 0.49379773284563677]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.05 : [0.3390764989662302, 0.33136482939632544, 0.8578199052132701, 0.8612408272181454, 0.8614334470989761]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.05 : [0.7420814479638009, 0.7514880952380952, 0.49242129809560825, 0.4996130030959752, 0.4895267649340574]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.05 : [0.6196566812521037, 0.6008078088185796, 0.4897340962638842, 0.49478290138000675, 0.4887243352406597]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.05 : [array([0.45381084, 0.8939553 , 0.45381084, ..., 0.43761998, 0.45381084,
       0.45381084], dtype=float32), array([0.43980885, 0.43980885, 0.444633  , ..., 0.43980885, 0.43980885,
       0.43980885], dtype=float32), array([0.45617354, 0.45617354, 0.45617354, ..., 0.45617354, 0.45617354,
       0.45617354], dtype=float32), array([0.4537837, 0.4537837, 0.3223761, ..., 0.4537837, 0.4537837,
       0.4537837], dtype=float32), array([0.45539203, 0.45539203, 0.45539203, ..., 0.25518635, 0.45539203,
       0.45539203], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.05 : [0.35048231511254024, 0.34782608695652173, 0.3821522309711286, 0.3731958762886598, 0.402457757296467]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.05 : [0.6741010992326113, 0.6800050492299924, 0.7063976244115237, 0.6857272816900145, 0.6867960326944534]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.05 : [0.7879518072289157, 0.8235294117647058, 0.8504672897196262, 0.8208616780045351, 0.805327868852459]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.05 : [0.2253618194348725, 0.2204724409448819, 0.24644549763033174, 0.24149432955303535, 0.26825938566552904]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.05 : [0.5920565466173006, 0.5759003702457085, 0.6038370918882531, 0.5907101985863346, 0.6072029619656681]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.05 : [array([0.39425351, 0.85829997, 0.39425351, ..., 0.39927919, 0.39425351,
       0.39425351]), array([0.38265151, 0.38265151, 0.6512363 , ..., 0.38835561, 0.38265151,
       0.38265151]), array([0.40143408, 0.40143408, 0.40143408, ..., 0.40143408, 0.40143408,
       0.40143408]), array([0.39678708, 0.77029842, 0.13691107, ..., 0.39678708, 0.39678708,
       0.39678708]), array([0.39956428, 0.39956428, 0.39956428, ..., 0.00253814, 0.39956428,
       0.39956428])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.05 : [0.41579210394802596, 0.4243879020643303, 0.4565112926477654, 0.4594467885607126, 0.47965941343424795]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.05 : [0.5992704668286845, 0.6045846506574377, 0.6176262259600351, 0.6145292513849813, 0.625892788346047]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.05 : [0.7563636363636363, 0.7906976744186046, 0.7864238410596026, 0.7728706624605678, 0.7812018489984591]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.05 : [0.2866988283942109, 0.2900262467191601, 0.32159783344617465, 0.3268845897264843, 0.3460750853242321]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.05 : [0.6065297879501851, 0.5964321777179401, 0.6193200942443622, 0.6119151800740491, 0.6297542914843487]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.05
Logistic F1-score 41.95736434108527
Logistic ROCAUC score: 59.74913649262381
Logistic Recall score: 29.079919408999327
Logistic Precision Score: 75.30434782608695
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[4020  426]
 [3168 1299]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.90      0.69      4446
           1       0.75      0.29      0.42      4467

    accuracy                           0.60      8913
   macro avg       0.66      0.60      0.56      8913
weighted avg       0.66      0.60      0.56      8913


Logistic Accuracy Score 59.67687647256816
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.06881523132324219 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.05
DCT F1-score 33.85207204056654
DCT ROCAUC score: 57.641130171263434
DCT Recall score: 21.670024625027985
DCT Precision Score: 77.31629392971246
DCT Confusion Matrix [[4162  284]
 [3499  968]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.54      0.94      0.69      4446
           1       0.77      0.22      0.34      4467

    accuracy                           0.58      8913
   macro avg       0.66      0.58      0.51      8913
weighted avg       0.66      0.58      0.51      8913


DCT Accuracy Score 57.5563783237967
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  0.3281564712524414 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.05
Naive F1-score 60.9600925390399
Naive ROCAUC score: 46.90348052459678
Naive Recall score: 82.58338929930602
Naive Precision Score: 48.310633839706654
Naive Confusion Matrix [[ 499 3947]
 [ 778 3689]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.39      0.11      0.17      4446
           1       0.48      0.83      0.61      4467

    accuracy                           0.47      8913
   macro avg       0.44      0.47      0.39      8913
weighted avg       0.44      0.47      0.39      8913


Naive Accuracy Score 46.987546280713566
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.014957666397094727 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.05
XGB F1-Score 32.70260621206712
XGB ROCAUC Score: 67.52521797048719
XGB Recall score: 80.70484581497797
XGB Precision Score: 20.50593239310499
XGB Confusion Matrix [[4227 3551]
 [ 219  916]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.54      0.69      7778
           1       0.21      0.81      0.33      1135

    accuracy                           0.58      8913
   macro avg       0.58      0.68      0.51      8913
weighted avg       0.86      0.58      0.65      8913


XGB Accuracy Score 46.987546280713566
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.4697415828704834 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.05
RFC F1 score 39.23269391159299
RFC ROCAUC Score: 59.204582291429695
RFC Recall score: 76.96335078534031
RFC Precision Score: 26.326393552719946
RFC Confusion Matrix [[4094  352]
 [3291 1176]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.55      0.92      0.69      4446
           1       0.77      0.26      0.39      4467

    accuracy                           0.59      8913
   macro avg       0.66      0.59      0.54      8913
weighted avg       0.66      0.59      0.54      8913


RFC Accuracy Score 59.127117693257034
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  112.34931683540344 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.15 : [array([0.47242205, 0.47242205, 0.47242205, ..., 0.4587806 , 0.47242205,
       0.47242205])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.15 : [0.4195736434108527]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.15 : [0.5974913649262381]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.15 : [0.2907991940899933]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.15 : [0.7530434782608696]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.15 : [0.5967687647256816]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.15 : [array([0.40399137, 0.40399137, 0.40399137, ..., 0.40399137, 0.40399137,
       0.40399137])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.15 : [0.3385207204056654]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.15 : [0.5764113017126343]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.15 : [0.21670024625027984]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.15 : [0.7731629392971247]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.15 : [0.575563783237967]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.15 : [array([0.5047138 , 0.5047138 , 0.5047138 , ..., 0.47402245, 0.5047138 ,
       0.5047138 ])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.15 : [0.609600925390399]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.15 : [0.4690348052459678]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.15 : [0.8258338929930602]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.15 : [0.4831063383970665]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.15 : [0.46987546280713566]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.15 : [array([0.4678606, 0.4678606, 0.4678606, ..., 0.4678606, 0.4678606,
       0.4678606], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.15 : [0.3270260621206712]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.15 : [0.675252179704872]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.15 : [0.8070484581497798]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.15 : [0.20505932393104992]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.15 : [0.5770223269381802]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.15 : [array([0.40388004, 0.40388004, 0.40388004, ..., 0.44444004, 0.40388004,
       0.40388004])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.15 : [0.3923269391159299]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.15 : [0.592045822914297]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.15 : [0.7696335078534031]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.15 : [0.26326393552719946]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.15 : [0.5912711769325704]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.1
Logistic F1-score 43.4493670886076
Logistic ROCAUC score: 59.79437435423351
Logistic Recall score: 30.923423423423422
Logistic Precision Score: 73.03191489361703
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[3966  507]
 [3067 1373]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.89      0.69      4473
           1       0.73      0.31      0.43      4440

    accuracy                           0.60      8913
   macro avg       0.65      0.60      0.56      8913
weighted avg       0.65      0.60      0.56      8913


Logistic Accuracy Score 59.901267811062496
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.11968135833740234 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.1
DCT F1-score 37.00051011732698
DCT ROCAUC score: 58.30635464438281
DCT Recall score: 24.504504504504503
DCT Precision Score: 75.50312283136711
DCT Confusion Matrix [[4120  353]
 [3352 1088]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.55      0.92      0.69      4473
           1       0.76      0.25      0.37      4440

    accuracy                           0.58      8913
   macro avg       0.65      0.58      0.53      8913
weighted avg       0.65      0.58      0.53      8913


DCT Accuracy Score 58.4315045439246
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  0.5694773197174072 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.1
Naive F1-score 62.06446348429212
Naive ROCAUC score: 47.9797176452106
Naive Recall score: 85.65315315315316
Naive Precision Score: 48.662827895073576
Naive Confusion Matrix [[ 461 4012]
 [ 637 3803]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.42      0.10      0.17      4473
           1       0.49      0.86      0.62      4440

    accuracy                           0.48      8913
   macro avg       0.45      0.48      0.39      8913
weighted avg       0.45      0.48      0.39      8913


Naive Accuracy Score 47.84023336699204
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.013962268829345703 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.1
XGB F1-Score 35.42461005199307
XGB ROCAUC Score: 65.88379824677082
XGB Recall score: 76.84210526315789
XGB Precision Score: 23.01801801801802
XGB Confusion Matrix [[4165 3418]
 [ 308 1022]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.93      0.55      0.69      7583
           1       0.23      0.77      0.35      1330

    accuracy                           0.58      8913
   macro avg       0.58      0.66      0.52      8913
weighted avg       0.83      0.58      0.64      8913


XGB Accuracy Score 47.84023336699204
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.4677464962005615 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.1
RFC F1 score 41.36237104961519
RFC ROCAUC Score: 59.70698817529804
RFC Recall score: 75.76484703059388
RFC Precision Score: 28.445945945945944
RFC Confusion Matrix [[4069  404]
 [3177 1263]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.91      0.69      4473
           1       0.76      0.28      0.41      4440

    accuracy                           0.60      8913
   macro avg       0.66      0.60      0.55      8913
weighted avg       0.66      0.60      0.55      8913


RFC Accuracy Score 59.82273084258948
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  271.99900555610657 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.15 : [array([0.47242205, 0.47242205, 0.47242205, ..., 0.4587806 , 0.47242205,
       0.47242205]), array([0.55047143, 0.62076209, 0.46977742, ..., 0.45945944, 0.45945944,
       0.45945944])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.15 : [0.4195736434108527, 0.434493670886076]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.15 : [0.5974913649262381, 0.5979437435423351]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.15 : [0.2907991940899933, 0.30923423423423424]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.15 : [0.7530434782608696, 0.7303191489361702]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.15 : [0.5967687647256816, 0.599012678110625]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.15 : [array([0.40399137, 0.40399137, 0.40399137, ..., 0.40399137, 0.40399137,
       0.40399137]), array([1.        , 0.75      , 0.4       , ..., 0.39143161, 0.39143161,
       0.39143161])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.15 : [0.3385207204056654, 0.37000510117326985]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.15 : [0.5764113017126343, 0.5830635464438281]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.15 : [0.21670024625027984, 0.24504504504504504]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.15 : [0.7731629392971247, 0.7550312283136711]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.15 : [0.575563783237967, 0.5843150454392461]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.15 : [array([0.5047138 , 0.5047138 , 0.5047138 , ..., 0.47402245, 0.5047138 ,
       0.5047138 ]), array([0.59730377, 0.67772256, 0.4853119 , ..., 0.50462885, 0.50462885,
       0.50462885])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.15 : [0.609600925390399, 0.6206446348429212]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.15 : [0.4690348052459678, 0.479797176452106]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.15 : [0.8258338929930602, 0.8565315315315315]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.15 : [0.4831063383970665, 0.48662827895073574]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.15 : [0.46987546280713566, 0.47840233366992035]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.15 : [array([0.4678606, 0.4678606, 0.4678606, ..., 0.4678606, 0.4678606,
       0.4678606], dtype=float32), array([0.7714083 , 0.58230406, 0.52027977, ..., 0.4549234 , 0.4549234 ,
       0.4549234 ], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.15 : [0.3270260621206712, 0.3542461005199307]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.15 : [0.675252179704872, 0.6588379824677082]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.15 : [0.8070484581497798, 0.7684210526315789]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.15 : [0.20505932393104992, 0.2301801801801802]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.15 : [0.5770223269381802, 0.5819589363850556]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.15 : [array([0.40388004, 0.40388004, 0.40388004, ..., 0.44444004, 0.40388004,
       0.40388004]), array([0.6232359 , 0.74538352, 0.40242997, ..., 0.39157492, 0.39157492,
       0.39157492])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.15 : [0.3923269391159299, 0.41362371049615193]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.15 : [0.592045822914297, 0.5970698817529804]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.15 : [0.7696335078534031, 0.7576484703059388]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.15 : [0.26326393552719946, 0.28445945945945944]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.15 : [0.5912711769325704, 0.5982273084258948]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.233
Logistic F1-score 48.229813664596286
Logistic ROCAUC score: 62.19959990133008
Logistic Recall score: 35.36779776816215
Logistic Precision Score: 75.79306979014153
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[4026  496]
 [2838 1553]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.59      0.89      0.71      4522
           1       0.76      0.35      0.48      4391

    accuracy                           0.63      8913
   macro avg       0.67      0.62      0.59      8913
weighted avg       0.67      0.63      0.60      8913


Logistic Accuracy Score 62.59396387299451
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.20943832397460938 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.233
DCT F1-score 43.195556281653325
DCT ROCAUC score: 60.542240365203604
DCT Recall score: 30.10703712138465
DCT Precision Score: 76.41618497109826
DCT Confusion Matrix [[4114  408]
 [3069 1322]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.91      0.70      4522
           1       0.76      0.30      0.43      4391

    accuracy                           0.61      8913
   macro avg       0.67      0.61      0.57      8913
weighted avg       0.67      0.61      0.57      8913


DCT Accuracy Score 60.98956580276001
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  1.203810214996338 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.233
Naive F1-score 62.14549938347719
Naive ROCAUC score: 48.88071183357136
Naive Recall score: 86.08517421999544
Naive Precision Score: 48.6236171854901
Naive Confusion Matrix [[ 528 3994]
 [ 611 3780]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.46      0.12      0.19      4522
           1       0.49      0.86      0.62      4391

    accuracy                           0.48      8913
   macro avg       0.47      0.49      0.40      8913
weighted avg       0.47      0.48      0.40      8913


Naive Accuracy Score 48.33389431167957
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.017993450164794922 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.233
XGB F1-Score 40.86021505376344
XGB ROCAUC Score: 69.31911675630373
XGB Recall score: 81.53950953678473
XGB Precision Score: 27.260305169665223
XGB Confusion Matrix [[4251 3194]
 [ 271 1197]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.94      0.57      0.71      7445
           1       0.27      0.82      0.41      1468

    accuracy                           0.61      8913
   macro avg       0.61      0.69      0.56      8913
weighted avg       0.83      0.61      0.66      8913


XGB Accuracy Score 48.33389431167957
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.6861624717712402 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.233
RFC F1 score 47.02007528230865
RFC ROCAUC Score: 61.69527634376576
RFC Recall score: 75.51637279596977
RFC Precision Score: 34.13800956501936
RFC Confusion Matrix [[4036  486]
 [2892 1499]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.58      0.89      0.70      4522
           1       0.76      0.34      0.47      4391

    accuracy                           0.62      8913
   macro avg       0.67      0.62      0.59      8913
weighted avg       0.67      0.62      0.59      8913


RFC Accuracy Score 62.100302928306974
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  784.4474005699158 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.15 : [array([0.47242205, 0.47242205, 0.47242205, ..., 0.4587806 , 0.47242205,
       0.47242205]), array([0.55047143, 0.62076209, 0.46977742, ..., 0.45945944, 0.45945944,
       0.45945944]), array([0.44898299, 0.39143105, 0.44898299, ..., 0.44898299, 0.44898299,
       0.44898299])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.15 : [0.4195736434108527, 0.434493670886076, 0.4822981366459628]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.15 : [0.5974913649262381, 0.5979437435423351, 0.6219959990133008]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.15 : [0.2907991940899933, 0.30923423423423424, 0.3536779776816215]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.15 : [0.7530434782608696, 0.7303191489361702, 0.7579306979014153]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.15 : [0.5967687647256816, 0.599012678110625, 0.6259396387299451]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.15 : [array([0.40399137, 0.40399137, 0.40399137, ..., 0.40399137, 0.40399137,
       0.40399137]), array([1.        , 0.75      , 0.4       , ..., 0.39143161, 0.39143161,
       0.39143161]), array([0.39395667, 0.39395667, 0.39395667, ..., 0.39395667, 0.39395667,
       0.39395667])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.15 : [0.3385207204056654, 0.37000510117326985, 0.43195556281653325]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.15 : [0.5764113017126343, 0.5830635464438281, 0.605422403652036]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.15 : [0.21670024625027984, 0.24504504504504504, 0.3010703712138465]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.15 : [0.7731629392971247, 0.7550312283136711, 0.7641618497109827]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.15 : [0.575563783237967, 0.5843150454392461, 0.6098956580276002]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.15 : [array([0.5047138 , 0.5047138 , 0.5047138 , ..., 0.47402245, 0.5047138 ,
       0.5047138 ]), array([0.59730377, 0.67772256, 0.4853119 , ..., 0.50462885, 0.50462885,
       0.50462885]), array([0.50530954, 0.38744941, 0.50530954, ..., 0.50530954, 0.50530954,
       0.50530954])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.15 : [0.609600925390399, 0.6206446348429212, 0.6214549938347719]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.15 : [0.4690348052459678, 0.479797176452106, 0.4888071183357136]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.15 : [0.8258338929930602, 0.8565315315315315, 0.8608517421999544]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.15 : [0.4831063383970665, 0.48662827895073574, 0.486236171854901]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.15 : [0.46987546280713566, 0.47840233366992035, 0.4833389431167957]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.15 : [array([0.4678606, 0.4678606, 0.4678606, ..., 0.4678606, 0.4678606,
       0.4678606], dtype=float32), array([0.7714083 , 0.58230406, 0.52027977, ..., 0.4549234 , 0.4549234 ,
       0.4549234 ], dtype=float32), array([0.45232356, 0.45232356, 0.45232356, ..., 0.45232356, 0.45232356,
       0.45232356], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.15 : [0.3270260621206712, 0.3542461005199307, 0.40860215053763443]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.15 : [0.675252179704872, 0.6588379824677082, 0.6931911675630372]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.15 : [0.8070484581497798, 0.7684210526315789, 0.8153950953678474]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.15 : [0.20505932393104992, 0.2301801801801802, 0.2726030516966522]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.15 : [0.5770223269381802, 0.5819589363850556, 0.6112420060585662]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.15 : [array([0.40388004, 0.40388004, 0.40388004, ..., 0.44444004, 0.40388004,
       0.40388004]), array([0.6232359 , 0.74538352, 0.40242997, ..., 0.39157492, 0.39157492,
       0.39157492]), array([0.39389129, 0.39389129, 0.39389129, ..., 0.39389129, 0.39389129,
       0.39389129])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.15 : [0.3923269391159299, 0.41362371049615193, 0.47020075282308654]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.15 : [0.592045822914297, 0.5970698817529804, 0.6169527634376576]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.15 : [0.7696335078534031, 0.7576484703059388, 0.7551637279596978]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.15 : [0.26326393552719946, 0.28445945945945944, 0.34138009565019356]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.15 : [0.5912711769325704, 0.5982273084258948, 0.6210030292830697]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.455
Logistic F1-score 48.20673453406421
Logistic ROCAUC score: 62.63820034272184
Logistic Recall score: 34.85843714609286
Logistic Precision Score: 78.12182741116752
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[4067  431]
 [2876 1539]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.59      0.90      0.71      4498
           1       0.78      0.35      0.48      4415

    accuracy                           0.63      8913
   macro avg       0.68      0.63      0.60      8913
weighted avg       0.68      0.63      0.60      8913


Logistic Accuracy Score 62.89689217996185
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.30817556381225586 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.455
DCT F1-score 43.8360655737705
DCT ROCAUC score: 61.273176904596326
DCT Recall score: 30.283125707814268
DCT Precision Score: 79.34718100890208
DCT Confusion Matrix [[4150  348]
 [3078 1337]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.92      0.71      4498
           1       0.79      0.30      0.44      4415

    accuracy                           0.62      8913
   macro avg       0.68      0.61      0.57      8913
weighted avg       0.68      0.62      0.57      8913


DCT Accuracy Score 61.56176371592057
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  2.5671629905700684 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.455
Naive F1-score 62.8576126274252
Naive ROCAUC score: 49.65396474184827
Naive Recall score: 86.59116647791619
Naive Precision Score: 49.33539811588592
Naive Confusion Matrix [[ 572 3926]
 [ 592 3823]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.49      0.13      0.20      4498
           1       0.49      0.87      0.63      4415

    accuracy                           0.49      8913
   macro avg       0.49      0.50      0.42      8913
weighted avg       0.49      0.49      0.41      8913


Naive Accuracy Score 49.309996634129924
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.017984390258789062 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.455
XGB F1-Score 39.18381462908525
XGB ROCAUC Score: 69.66131573134294
XGB Recall score: 82.82163742690058
XGB Precision Score: 25.662514156285393
XGB Confusion Matrix [[4263 3282]
 [ 235 1133]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.57      0.71      7545
           1       0.26      0.83      0.39      1368

    accuracy                           0.61      8913
   macro avg       0.60      0.70      0.55      8913
weighted avg       0.84      0.61      0.66      8913


XGB Accuracy Score 49.309996634129924
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.9404821395874023 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.455
RFC F1 score 46.730462519936204
RFC ROCAUC Score: 62.255906362309254
RFC Recall score: 78.97574123989219
RFC Precision Score: 33.182332955832386
RFC Confusion Matrix [[4108  390]
 [2950 1465]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.58      0.91      0.71      4498
           1       0.79      0.33      0.47      4415

    accuracy                           0.63      8913
   macro avg       0.69      0.62      0.59      8913
weighted avg       0.68      0.63      0.59      8913


RFC Accuracy Score 62.5266464714462
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  1727.6808099746704 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.15 : [array([0.47242205, 0.47242205, 0.47242205, ..., 0.4587806 , 0.47242205,
       0.47242205]), array([0.55047143, 0.62076209, 0.46977742, ..., 0.45945944, 0.45945944,
       0.45945944]), array([0.44898299, 0.39143105, 0.44898299, ..., 0.44898299, 0.44898299,
       0.44898299]), array([0.44327916, 0.44327916, 0.44327916, ..., 0.31698675, 0.44327916,
       0.44327916])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.15 : [0.4195736434108527, 0.434493670886076, 0.4822981366459628, 0.4820673453406421]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.15 : [0.5974913649262381, 0.5979437435423351, 0.6219959990133008, 0.6263820034272184]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.15 : [0.2907991940899933, 0.30923423423423424, 0.3536779776816215, 0.34858437146092863]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.15 : [0.7530434782608696, 0.7303191489361702, 0.7579306979014153, 0.7812182741116751]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.15 : [0.5967687647256816, 0.599012678110625, 0.6259396387299451, 0.6289689217996185]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.15 : [array([0.40399137, 0.40399137, 0.40399137, ..., 0.40399137, 0.40399137,
       0.40399137]), array([1.        , 0.75      , 0.4       , ..., 0.39143161, 0.39143161,
       0.39143161]), array([0.39395667, 0.39395667, 0.39395667, ..., 0.39395667, 0.39395667,
       0.39395667]), array([0.39599041, 0.39599041, 0.39599041, ..., 0.5       , 0.39599041,
       0.39599041])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.15 : [0.3385207204056654, 0.37000510117326985, 0.43195556281653325, 0.43836065573770494]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.15 : [0.5764113017126343, 0.5830635464438281, 0.605422403652036, 0.6127317690459633]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.15 : [0.21670024625027984, 0.24504504504504504, 0.3010703712138465, 0.3028312570781427]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.15 : [0.7731629392971247, 0.7550312283136711, 0.7641618497109827, 0.7934718100890208]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.15 : [0.575563783237967, 0.5843150454392461, 0.6098956580276002, 0.6156176371592057]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.15 : [array([0.5047138 , 0.5047138 , 0.5047138 , ..., 0.47402245, 0.5047138 ,
       0.5047138 ]), array([0.59730377, 0.67772256, 0.4853119 , ..., 0.50462885, 0.50462885,
       0.50462885]), array([0.50530954, 0.38744941, 0.50530954, ..., 0.50530954, 0.50530954,
       0.50530954]), array([0.50196049, 0.43601522, 0.50196049, ..., 0.32509104, 0.50196049,
       0.50196049])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.15 : [0.609600925390399, 0.6206446348429212, 0.6214549938347719, 0.628576126274252]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.15 : [0.4690348052459678, 0.479797176452106, 0.4888071183357136, 0.4965396474184827]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.15 : [0.8258338929930602, 0.8565315315315315, 0.8608517421999544, 0.8659116647791619]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.15 : [0.4831063383970665, 0.48662827895073574, 0.486236171854901, 0.4933539811588592]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.15 : [0.46987546280713566, 0.47840233366992035, 0.4833389431167957, 0.4930999663412992]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.15 : [array([0.4678606, 0.4678606, 0.4678606, ..., 0.4678606, 0.4678606,
       0.4678606], dtype=float32), array([0.7714083 , 0.58230406, 0.52027977, ..., 0.4549234 , 0.4549234 ,
       0.4549234 ], dtype=float32), array([0.45232356, 0.45232356, 0.45232356, ..., 0.45232356, 0.45232356,
       0.45232356], dtype=float32), array([0.45279545, 0.45279545, 0.45279545, ..., 0.45279545, 0.45279545,
       0.45279545], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.15 : [0.3270260621206712, 0.3542461005199307, 0.40860215053763443, 0.3918381462908525]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.15 : [0.675252179704872, 0.6588379824677082, 0.6931911675630372, 0.6966131573134293]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.15 : [0.8070484581497798, 0.7684210526315789, 0.8153950953678474, 0.8282163742690059]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.15 : [0.20505932393104992, 0.2301801801801802, 0.2726030516966522, 0.25662514156285393]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.15 : [0.5770223269381802, 0.5819589363850556, 0.6112420060585662, 0.6054078312577135]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.15 : [array([0.40388004, 0.40388004, 0.40388004, ..., 0.44444004, 0.40388004,
       0.40388004]), array([0.6232359 , 0.74538352, 0.40242997, ..., 0.39157492, 0.39157492,
       0.39157492]), array([0.39389129, 0.39389129, 0.39389129, ..., 0.39389129, 0.39389129,
       0.39389129]), array([0.39607815, 0.39607815, 0.39607815, ..., 0.4829704 , 0.39607815,
       0.39607815])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.15 : [0.3923269391159299, 0.41362371049615193, 0.47020075282308654, 0.46730462519936206]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.15 : [0.592045822914297, 0.5970698817529804, 0.6169527634376576, 0.6225590636230925]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.15 : [0.7696335078534031, 0.7576484703059388, 0.7551637279596978, 0.7897574123989218]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.15 : [0.26326393552719946, 0.28445945945945944, 0.34138009565019356, 0.3318233295583239]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.15 : [0.5912711769325704, 0.5982273084258948, 0.6210030292830697, 0.625266464714462]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.565
Logistic F1-score 47.85870584557674
Logistic ROCAUC score: 62.56835967789558
Logistic Recall score: 34.358168761220824
Logistic Precision Score: 78.83625128733264
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[4046  411]
 [2925 1531]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.58      0.91      0.71      4457
           1       0.79      0.34      0.48      4456

    accuracy                           0.63      8913
   macro avg       0.68      0.63      0.59      8913
weighted avg       0.68      0.63      0.59      8913


Logistic Accuracy Score 62.57152473914507
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.1994304656982422 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.565
DCT F1-score 44.0551500405515
DCT ROCAUC score: 61.30025530211086
DCT Recall score: 30.47576301615799
DCT Precision Score: 79.46167349327092
DCT Confusion Matrix [[4106  351]
 [3098 1358]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.92      0.70      4457
           1       0.79      0.30      0.44      4456

    accuracy                           0.61      8913
   macro avg       0.68      0.61      0.57      8913
weighted avg       0.68      0.61      0.57      8913


DCT Accuracy Score 61.30371367665208
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  3.2273619174957275 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.565
Naive F1-score 48.0485150054424
Naive ROCAUC score: 62.51230338253142
Naive Recall score: 34.67235188509875
Naive Precision Score: 78.22784810126582
Naive Confusion Matrix [[4027  430]
 [2911 1545]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.58      0.90      0.71      4457
           1       0.78      0.35      0.48      4456

    accuracy                           0.63      8913
   macro avg       0.68      0.63      0.59      8913
weighted avg       0.68      0.63      0.59      8913


Naive Accuracy Score 62.51542690452149
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.01994609832763672 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.565
XGB F1-Score 40.50546448087432
XGB ROCAUC Score: 70.59486414025213
XGB Recall score: 84.71428571428572
XGB Precision Score: 26.61579892280072
XGB Confusion Matrix [[4243 3270]
 [ 214 1186]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.56      0.71      7513
           1       0.27      0.85      0.41      1400

    accuracy                           0.61      8913
   macro avg       0.61      0.71      0.56      8913
weighted avg       0.84      0.61      0.66      8913


XGB Accuracy Score 62.51542690452149
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  1.0681109428405762 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.15 0.565
RFC F1 score 46.69199113643558
RFC ROCAUC Score: 62.209232828838424
RFC Recall score: 79.21589688506981
RFC Precision Score: 33.101436265709154
RFC Confusion Matrix [[4070  387]
 [2981 1475]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.58      0.91      0.71      4457
           1       0.79      0.33      0.47      4456

    accuracy                           0.62      8913
   macro avg       0.68      0.62      0.59      8913
weighted avg       0.68      0.62      0.59      8913


RFC Accuracy Score 62.21249859755413
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  2196.3948006629944 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.15 : [array([0.47242205, 0.47242205, 0.47242205, ..., 0.4587806 , 0.47242205,
       0.47242205]), array([0.55047143, 0.62076209, 0.46977742, ..., 0.45945944, 0.45945944,
       0.45945944]), array([0.44898299, 0.39143105, 0.44898299, ..., 0.44898299, 0.44898299,
       0.44898299]), array([0.44327916, 0.44327916, 0.44327916, ..., 0.31698675, 0.44327916,
       0.44327916]), array([0.43989311, 0.68392041, 0.57162049, ..., 0.43989311, 0.51690975,
       0.57298797])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.15 : [0.4195736434108527, 0.434493670886076, 0.4822981366459628, 0.4820673453406421, 0.47858705845576743]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.15 : [0.5974913649262381, 0.5979437435423351, 0.6219959990133008, 0.6263820034272184, 0.6256835967789558]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.15 : [0.2907991940899933, 0.30923423423423424, 0.3536779776816215, 0.34858437146092863, 0.34358168761220825]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.15 : [0.7530434782608696, 0.7303191489361702, 0.7579306979014153, 0.7812182741116751, 0.7883625128733265]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.15 : [0.5967687647256816, 0.599012678110625, 0.6259396387299451, 0.6289689217996185, 0.6257152473914507]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.15 : [array([0.40399137, 0.40399137, 0.40399137, ..., 0.40399137, 0.40399137,
       0.40399137]), array([1.        , 0.75      , 0.4       , ..., 0.39143161, 0.39143161,
       0.39143161]), array([0.39395667, 0.39395667, 0.39395667, ..., 0.39395667, 0.39395667,
       0.39395667]), array([0.39599041, 0.39599041, 0.39599041, ..., 0.5       , 0.39599041,
       0.39599041]), array([0.39582649, 1.        , 1.        , ..., 0.39582649, 0.5       ,
       1.        ])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.15 : [0.3385207204056654, 0.37000510117326985, 0.43195556281653325, 0.43836065573770494, 0.44055150040551505]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.15 : [0.5764113017126343, 0.5830635464438281, 0.605422403652036, 0.6127317690459633, 0.6130025530211086]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.15 : [0.21670024625027984, 0.24504504504504504, 0.3010703712138465, 0.3028312570781427, 0.3047576301615799]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.15 : [0.7731629392971247, 0.7550312283136711, 0.7641618497109827, 0.7934718100890208, 0.7946167349327092]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.15 : [0.575563783237967, 0.5843150454392461, 0.6098956580276002, 0.6156176371592057, 0.6130371367665208]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.15 : [array([0.5047138 , 0.5047138 , 0.5047138 , ..., 0.47402245, 0.5047138 ,
       0.5047138 ]), array([0.59730377, 0.67772256, 0.4853119 , ..., 0.50462885, 0.50462885,
       0.50462885]), array([0.50530954, 0.38744941, 0.50530954, ..., 0.50530954, 0.50530954,
       0.50530954]), array([0.50196049, 0.43601522, 0.50196049, ..., 0.32509104, 0.50196049,
       0.50196049]), array([0.49955317, 0.75425258, 0.6757666 , ..., 0.49955317, 0.48508189,
       0.75292944])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.15 : [0.609600925390399, 0.6206446348429212, 0.6214549938347719, 0.628576126274252, 0.48048515005442394]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.15 : [0.4690348052459678, 0.479797176452106, 0.4888071183357136, 0.4965396474184827, 0.6251230338253142]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.15 : [0.8258338929930602, 0.8565315315315315, 0.8608517421999544, 0.8659116647791619, 0.34672351885098746]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.15 : [0.4831063383970665, 0.48662827895073574, 0.486236171854901, 0.4933539811588592, 0.7822784810126582]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.15 : [0.46987546280713566, 0.47840233366992035, 0.4833389431167957, 0.4930999663412992, 0.6251542690452149]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.15 : [array([0.4678606, 0.4678606, 0.4678606, ..., 0.4678606, 0.4678606,
       0.4678606], dtype=float32), array([0.7714083 , 0.58230406, 0.52027977, ..., 0.4549234 , 0.4549234 ,
       0.4549234 ], dtype=float32), array([0.45232356, 0.45232356, 0.45232356, ..., 0.45232356, 0.45232356,
       0.45232356], dtype=float32), array([0.45279545, 0.45279545, 0.45279545, ..., 0.45279545, 0.45279545,
       0.45279545], dtype=float32), array([0.45163524, 0.6173441 , 0.45163524, ..., 0.45163524, 0.45163524,
       0.6136686 ], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.15 : [0.3270260621206712, 0.3542461005199307, 0.40860215053763443, 0.3918381462908525, 0.4050546448087432]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.15 : [0.675252179704872, 0.6588379824677082, 0.6931911675630372, 0.6966131573134293, 0.7059486414025213]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.15 : [0.8070484581497798, 0.7684210526315789, 0.8153950953678474, 0.8282163742690059, 0.8471428571428572]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.15 : [0.20505932393104992, 0.2301801801801802, 0.2726030516966522, 0.25662514156285393, 0.2661579892280072]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.15 : [0.5770223269381802, 0.5819589363850556, 0.6112420060585662, 0.6054078312577135, 0.60911028834287]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.15 : [array([0.40388004, 0.40388004, 0.40388004, ..., 0.44444004, 0.40388004,
       0.40388004]), array([0.6232359 , 0.74538352, 0.40242997, ..., 0.39157492, 0.39157492,
       0.39157492]), array([0.39389129, 0.39389129, 0.39389129, ..., 0.39389129, 0.39389129,
       0.39389129]), array([0.39607815, 0.39607815, 0.39607815, ..., 0.4829704 , 0.39607815,
       0.39607815]), array([0.39585735, 0.82834042, 0.78909029, ..., 0.39585735, 0.48816499,
       0.63776654])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.15 : [0.3923269391159299, 0.41362371049615193, 0.47020075282308654, 0.46730462519936206, 0.46691991136435584]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.15 : [0.592045822914297, 0.5970698817529804, 0.6169527634376576, 0.6225590636230925, 0.6220923282883842]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.15 : [0.7696335078534031, 0.7576484703059388, 0.7551637279596978, 0.7897574123989218, 0.7921589688506981]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.15 : [0.26326393552719946, 0.28445945945945944, 0.34138009565019356, 0.3318233295583239, 0.33101436265709155]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.15 : [0.5912711769325704, 0.5982273084258948, 0.6210030292830697, 0.625266464714462, 0.6221249859755413]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.078
Logistic F1-score 43.26941332827036
Logistic ROCAUC score: 59.5335612371232
Logistic Recall score: 30.93945153407548
Logistic Precision Score: 71.93813131313132
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[6599  889]
 [5087 2279]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.88      0.69      7488
           1       0.72      0.31      0.43      7366

    accuracy                           0.60     14854
   macro avg       0.64      0.60      0.56     14854
weighted avg       0.64      0.60      0.56     14854


Logistic Accuracy Score 59.7684125488084
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.16156697273254395 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.078
DCT F1-score 37.021885866230306
DCT ROCAUC score: 58.266414787508324
DCT Recall score: 24.572359489546567
DCT Precision Score: 75.04145936981757
DCT Confusion Matrix [[6886  602]
 [5556 1810]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.55      0.92      0.69      7488
           1       0.75      0.25      0.37      7366

    accuracy                           0.59     14854
   macro avg       0.65      0.58      0.53     14854
weighted avg       0.65      0.59      0.53     14854


DCT Accuracy Score 58.54315335936449
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  0.4498288631439209 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.078
Naive F1-score 61.4857590290692
Naive ROCAUC score: 47.329368042356776
Naive Recall score: 85.28373608471355
Naive Precision Score: 48.07162534435262
Naive Confusion Matrix [[ 702 6786]
 [1084 6282]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.39      0.09      0.15      7488
           1       0.48      0.85      0.61      7366

    accuracy                           0.47     14854
   macro avg       0.44      0.47      0.38     14854
weighted avg       0.44      0.47      0.38     14854


Naive Accuracy Score 47.017638346573314
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.019947528839111328 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.078
XGB F1-Score 35.87126341006145
XGB ROCAUC Score: 66.16038667589248
XGB Recall score: 77.04697986577182
XGB Precision Score: 23.3776812381211
XGB Confusion Matrix [[6975 5644]
 [ 513 1722]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.93      0.55      0.69     12619
           1       0.23      0.77      0.36      2235

    accuracy                           0.59     14854
   macro avg       0.58      0.66      0.53     14854
weighted avg       0.83      0.59      0.64     14854


XGB Accuracy Score 47.017638346573314
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.4946763515472412 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.078
RFC F1 score 40.7885657959586
RFC ROCAUC Score: 59.30333859544083
RFC Recall score: 74.45124145376035
RFC Precision Score: 28.08851479771925
RFC Confusion Matrix [[6778  710]
 [5297 2069]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.91      0.69      7488
           1       0.74      0.28      0.41      7366

    accuracy                           0.60     14854
   macro avg       0.65      0.59      0.55     14854
weighted avg       0.65      0.60      0.55     14854


RFC Accuracy Score 59.55971455500202
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  199.37239861488342 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.25 : [array([0.79399033, 0.46883279, 0.56018509, ..., 0.65505992, 0.46883279,
       0.62503549])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.25 : [0.4326941332827036]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.25 : [0.595335612371232]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.25 : [0.3093945153407548]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.25 : [0.7193813131313131]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.25 : [0.597684125488084]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.25 : [array([1.        , 0.40393239, 0.        , ..., 1.        , 0.40393239,
       1.        ])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.25 : [0.3702188586623031]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.25 : [0.5826641478750832]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.25 : [0.24572359489546566]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.25 : [0.7504145936981758]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.25 : [0.5854315335936449]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.25 : [array([0.91846999, 0.511653  , 0.74646238, ..., 0.74946662, 0.511653  ,
       0.7829968 ])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.25 : [0.614857590290692]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.25 : [0.47329368042356773]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.25 : [0.8528373608471355]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.25 : [0.4807162534435262]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.25 : [0.47017638346573315]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.25 : [array([0.99594265, 0.46228522, 0.54526985, ..., 0.46228522, 0.46228522,
       0.46228522], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.25 : [0.3587126341006145]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.25 : [0.6616038667589248]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.25 : [0.7704697986577181]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.25 : [0.23377681238121098]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.25 : [0.5854988555271308]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.25 : [array([0.8518938 , 0.40360404, 0.56308205, ..., 0.85372038, 0.40360404,
       0.92634006])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.25 : [0.407885657959586]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.25 : [0.5930333859544082]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.25 : [0.7445124145376034]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.25 : [0.2808851479771925]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.25 : [0.5955971455500202]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.158
Logistic F1-score 45.01467664046965
Logistic ROCAUC score: 60.89060535243881
Logistic Recall score: 32.02209349319682
Logistic Precision Score: 75.74888463989802
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[6670  761]
 [5046 2377]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.90      0.70      7431
           1       0.76      0.32      0.45      7423

    accuracy                           0.61     14854
   macro avg       0.66      0.61      0.57     14854
weighted avg       0.66      0.61      0.57     14854


Logistic Accuracy Score 60.90615322472062
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.11765193939208984 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.158
DCT F1-score 39.84031936127744
DCT ROCAUC score: 59.40082863561707
DCT Recall score: 26.889397817593963
DCT Precision Score: 76.85791297651136
DCT Confusion Matrix [[6830  601]
 [5427 1996]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.92      0.69      7431
           1       0.77      0.27      0.40      7423

    accuracy                           0.59     14854
   macro avg       0.66      0.59      0.55     14854
weighted avg       0.66      0.59      0.55     14854


DCT Accuracy Score 59.418338494681564
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  0.8497622013092041 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.158
Naive F1-score 48.12511432229742
Naive ROCAUC score: 61.80080413974445
Naive Recall score: 35.44389061026539
Naive Precision Score: 74.93591569353461
Naive Confusion Matrix [[6551  880]
 [4792 2631]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.58      0.88      0.70      7431
           1       0.75      0.35      0.48      7423

    accuracy                           0.62     14854
   macro avg       0.66      0.62      0.59     14854
weighted avg       0.66      0.62      0.59     14854


Naive Accuracy Score 61.814999326780665
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.01998114585876465 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.158
XGB F1-Score 36.71244365237447
XGB ROCAUC Score: 69.11114460075252
XGB Recall score: 82.75047258979205
XGB Precision Score: 23.588845480264045
XGB Confusion Matrix [[7066 5672]
 [ 365 1751]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.55      0.70     12738
           1       0.24      0.83      0.37      2116

    accuracy                           0.59     14854
   macro avg       0.59      0.69      0.53     14854
weighted avg       0.85      0.59      0.65     14854


XGB Accuracy Score 61.814999326780665
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.5455379486083984 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.158
RFC F1 score 43.92119173474291
RFC ROCAUC Score: 60.70153825994426
RFC Recall score: 76.62642521797451
RFC Precision Score: 30.78270241142395
RFC Confusion Matrix [[6734  697]
 [5138 2285]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.91      0.70      7431
           1       0.77      0.31      0.44      7423

    accuracy                           0.61     14854
   macro avg       0.67      0.61      0.57     14854
weighted avg       0.67      0.61      0.57     14854


RFC Accuracy Score 60.717651810960014
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  508.26770853996277 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.25 : [array([0.79399033, 0.46883279, 0.56018509, ..., 0.65505992, 0.46883279,
       0.62503549]), array([0.44860114, 0.30609821, 0.44860114, ..., 0.44860114, 0.2746427 ,
       0.45821607])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.25 : [0.4326941332827036, 0.45014676640469653]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.25 : [0.595335612371232, 0.6089060535243881]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.25 : [0.3093945153407548, 0.3202209349319682]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.25 : [0.7193813131313131, 0.7574888463989803]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.25 : [0.597684125488084, 0.6090615322472062]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.25 : [array([1.        , 0.40393239, 0.        , ..., 1.        , 0.40393239,
       1.        ]), array([0.38966102, 0.        , 0.38966102, ..., 0.38966102, 0.24242424,
       0.38966102])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.25 : [0.3702188586623031, 0.3984031936127744]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.25 : [0.5826641478750832, 0.5940082863561706]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.25 : [0.24572359489546566, 0.26889397817593963]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.25 : [0.7504145936981758, 0.7685791297651136]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.25 : [0.5854315335936449, 0.5941833849468157]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.25 : [array([0.91846999, 0.511653  , 0.74646238, ..., 0.74946662, 0.511653  ,
       0.7829968 ]), array([0.49536593, 0.22800077, 0.49536593, ..., 0.49536593, 0.24531631,
       0.52831952])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.25 : [0.614857590290692, 0.4812511432229742]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.25 : [0.47329368042356773, 0.6180080413974445]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.25 : [0.8528373608471355, 0.35443890610265394]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.25 : [0.4807162534435262, 0.749359156935346]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.25 : [0.47017638346573315, 0.6181499932678066]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.25 : [array([0.99594265, 0.46228522, 0.54526985, ..., 0.46228522, 0.46228522,
       0.46228522], dtype=float32), array([0.44879517, 0.44879517, 0.44879517, ..., 0.44879517, 0.32084212,
       0.44879517], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.25 : [0.3587126341006145, 0.36712443652374466]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.25 : [0.6616038667589248, 0.6911114460075253]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.25 : [0.7704697986577181, 0.8275047258979206]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.25 : [0.23377681238121098, 0.23588845480264045]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.25 : [0.5854988555271308, 0.5935774875454423]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.25 : [array([0.8518938 , 0.40360404, 0.56308205, ..., 0.85372038, 0.40360404,
       0.92634006]), array([0.38919851, 0.0563929 , 0.38919851, ..., 0.38919851, 0.24078889,
       0.38919851])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.25 : [0.407885657959586, 0.4392119173474291]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.25 : [0.5930333859544082, 0.6070153825994425]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.25 : [0.7445124145376034, 0.7662642521797451]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.25 : [0.2808851479771925, 0.3078270241142395]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.25 : [0.5955971455500202, 0.6071765181096002]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.249
Logistic F1-score 46.3124054462935
Logistic ROCAUC score: 61.697497833980165
Logistic Recall score: 33.06331848251654
Logistic Precision Score: 77.27989902177343
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[6727  720]
 [4958 2449]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.58      0.90      0.70      7447
           1       0.77      0.33      0.46      7407

    accuracy                           0.62     14854
   macro avg       0.67      0.62      0.58     14854
weighted avg       0.67      0.62      0.58     14854


Logistic Accuracy Score 61.774606166689104
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.19747138023376465 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.249
DCT F1-score 41.86878727634194
DCT ROCAUC score: 60.543662048586036
DCT Recall score: 28.4325637910085
DCT Precision Score: 79.3818318884282
DCT Confusion Matrix [[6900  547]
 [5301 2106]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.93      0.70      7447
           1       0.79      0.28      0.42      7407

    accuracy                           0.61     14854
   macro avg       0.68      0.61      0.56     14854
weighted avg       0.68      0.61      0.56     14854


DCT Accuracy Score 60.6301332974283
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  1.3264515399932861 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.249
Naive F1-score 48.68796611730044
Naive ROCAUC score: 62.409550055802285
Naive Recall score: 35.69596327798029
Naive Precision Score: 76.54892877822815
Naive Confusion Matrix [[6637  810]
 [4763 2644]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.58      0.89      0.70      7447
           1       0.77      0.36      0.49      7407

    accuracy                           0.62     14854
   macro avg       0.67      0.62      0.60     14854
weighted avg       0.67      0.62      0.60     14854


Naive Accuracy Score 62.48148646829137
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.022903919219970703 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.249
XGB F1-Score 39.006799917576764
XGB ROCAUC Score: 69.21069521162129
XGB Recall score: 82.34014789038713
XGB Precision Score: 25.55690562980964
XGB Confusion Matrix [[7041 5514]
 [ 406 1893]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.56      0.70     12555
           1       0.26      0.82      0.39      2299

    accuracy                           0.60     14854
   macro avg       0.60      0.69      0.55     14854
weighted avg       0.84      0.60      0.66     14854


XGB Accuracy Score 62.48148646829137
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.7051117420196533 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.249
RFC F1 score 45.295698924731184
RFC ROCAUC Score: 61.55995233423886
RFC Recall score: 78.39813891658358
RFC Precision Score: 31.848251653840958
RFC Confusion Matrix [[6797  650]
 [5048 2359]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.91      0.70      7447
           1       0.78      0.32      0.45      7407

    accuracy                           0.62     14854
   macro avg       0.68      0.62      0.58     14854
weighted avg       0.68      0.62      0.58     14854


RFC Accuracy Score 61.63996229971724
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  874.9784848690033 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.25 : [array([0.79399033, 0.46883279, 0.56018509, ..., 0.65505992, 0.46883279,
       0.62503549]), array([0.44860114, 0.30609821, 0.44860114, ..., 0.44860114, 0.2746427 ,
       0.45821607]), array([0.36632473, 0.22211775, 0.44128865, ..., 0.44128865, 0.44128865,
       0.44128865])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.25 : [0.4326941332827036, 0.45014676640469653, 0.46312405446293503]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.25 : [0.595335612371232, 0.6089060535243881, 0.6169749783398016]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.25 : [0.3093945153407548, 0.3202209349319682, 0.3306331848251654]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.25 : [0.7193813131313131, 0.7574888463989803, 0.7727989902177343]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.25 : [0.597684125488084, 0.6090615322472062, 0.617746061666891]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.25 : [array([1.        , 0.40393239, 0.        , ..., 1.        , 0.40393239,
       1.        ]), array([0.38966102, 0.        , 0.38966102, ..., 0.38966102, 0.24242424,
       0.38966102]), array([0.        , 0.        , 0.38788455, ..., 0.38788455, 0.38788455,
       0.38788455])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.25 : [0.3702188586623031, 0.3984031936127744, 0.4186878727634194]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.25 : [0.5826641478750832, 0.5940082863561706, 0.6054366204858603]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.25 : [0.24572359489546566, 0.26889397817593963, 0.284325637910085]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.25 : [0.7504145936981758, 0.7685791297651136, 0.7938183188842819]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.25 : [0.5854315335936449, 0.5941833849468157, 0.606301332974283]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.25 : [array([0.91846999, 0.511653  , 0.74646238, ..., 0.74946662, 0.511653  ,
       0.7829968 ]), array([0.49536593, 0.22800077, 0.49536593, ..., 0.49536593, 0.24531631,
       0.52831952]), array([0.3499494 , 0.15351548, 0.49580911, ..., 0.49580911, 0.49580911,
       0.49580911])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.25 : [0.614857590290692, 0.4812511432229742, 0.4868796611730044]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.25 : [0.47329368042356773, 0.6180080413974445, 0.6240955005580229]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.25 : [0.8528373608471355, 0.35443890610265394, 0.3569596327798029]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.25 : [0.4807162534435262, 0.749359156935346, 0.7654892877822814]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.25 : [0.47017638346573315, 0.6181499932678066, 0.6248148646829137]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.25 : [array([0.99594265, 0.46228522, 0.54526985, ..., 0.46228522, 0.46228522,
       0.46228522], dtype=float32), array([0.44879517, 0.44879517, 0.44879517, ..., 0.44879517, 0.32084212,
       0.44879517], dtype=float32), array([0.445681  , 0.31459686, 0.445681  , ..., 0.445681  , 0.445681  ,
       0.445681  ], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.25 : [0.3587126341006145, 0.36712443652374466, 0.3900679991757676]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.25 : [0.6616038667589248, 0.6911114460075253, 0.6921069521162129]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.25 : [0.7704697986577181, 0.8275047258979206, 0.8234014789038713]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.25 : [0.23377681238121098, 0.23588845480264045, 0.2555690562980964]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.25 : [0.5854988555271308, 0.5935774875454423, 0.601454153763296]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.25 : [array([0.8518938 , 0.40360404, 0.56308205, ..., 0.85372038, 0.40360404,
       0.92634006]), array([0.38919851, 0.0563929 , 0.38919851, ..., 0.38919851, 0.24078889,
       0.38919851]), array([0.14275822, 0.00233343, 0.38780444, ..., 0.38780444, 0.38780444,
       0.38780444])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.25 : [0.407885657959586, 0.4392119173474291, 0.4529569892473118]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.25 : [0.5930333859544082, 0.6070153825994425, 0.6155995233423885]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.25 : [0.7445124145376034, 0.7662642521797451, 0.7839813891658358]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.25 : [0.2808851479771925, 0.3078270241142395, 0.3184825165384096]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.25 : [0.5955971455500202, 0.6071765181096002, 0.6163996229971724]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.333
Logistic F1-score 47.26181545386347
Logistic ROCAUC score: 62.055132678491034
Logistic Recall score: 34.03106009453072
Logistic Precision Score: 77.32433261736729
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[6710  739]
 [4885 2520]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.58      0.90      0.70      7449
           1       0.77      0.34      0.47      7405

    accuracy                           0.62     14854
   macro avg       0.68      0.62      0.59     14854
weighted avg       0.68      0.62      0.59     14854


Logistic Accuracy Score 62.13814460751313
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.3161163330078125 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.333
DCT F1-score 42.34393404004711
DCT ROCAUC score: 60.362577160976436
DCT Recall score: 29.12896691424713
DCT Precision Score: 77.50628817822493
DCT Confusion Matrix [[6823  626]
 [5248 2157]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.92      0.70      7449
           1       0.78      0.29      0.42      7405

    accuracy                           0.60     14854
   macro avg       0.67      0.60      0.56     14854
weighted avg       0.67      0.60      0.56     14854


DCT Accuracy Score 60.45509627036488
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  1.8052036762237549 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.333
Naive F1-score 62.68012939907851
Naive ROCAUC score: 48.852145976842394
Naive Recall score: 86.3470627954085
Naive Precision Score: 49.19596830037701
Naive Confusion Matrix [[ 846 6603]
 [1011 6394]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.46      0.11      0.18      7449
           1       0.49      0.86      0.63      7405

    accuracy                           0.49     14854
   macro avg       0.47      0.49      0.40     14854
weighted avg       0.47      0.49      0.40     14854


Naive Accuracy Score 48.74107984381311
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.02190256118774414 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.333
XGB F1-Score 40.073831009023785
XGB ROCAUC Score: 69.83581312062178
XGB Recall score: 83.25521942905837
XGB Precision Score: 26.38757596218771
XGB Confusion Matrix [[7056 5451]
 [ 393 1954]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.56      0.71     12507
           1       0.26      0.83      0.40      2347

    accuracy                           0.61     14854
   macro avg       0.61      0.70      0.55     14854
weighted avg       0.84      0.61      0.66     14854


XGB Accuracy Score 48.74107984381311
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.7669117450714111 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.333
RFC F1 score 46.21952376434873
RFC ROCAUC Score: 61.74972844829423
RFC Recall score: 77.67857142857143
RFC Precision Score: 32.89669142471303
RFC Confusion Matrix [[6749  700]
 [4969 2436]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.58      0.91      0.70      7449
           1       0.78      0.33      0.46      7405

    accuracy                           0.62     14854
   macro avg       0.68      0.62      0.58     14854
weighted avg       0.68      0.62      0.58     14854


RFC Accuracy Score 61.83519590682644
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  1222.6126124858856 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.25 : [array([0.79399033, 0.46883279, 0.56018509, ..., 0.65505992, 0.46883279,
       0.62503549]), array([0.44860114, 0.30609821, 0.44860114, ..., 0.44860114, 0.2746427 ,
       0.45821607]), array([0.36632473, 0.22211775, 0.44128865, ..., 0.44128865, 0.44128865,
       0.44128865]), array([0.44886449, 0.54658915, 0.44886449, ..., 0.44886449, 0.36185029,
       0.44886449])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.25 : [0.4326941332827036, 0.45014676640469653, 0.46312405446293503, 0.4726181545386347]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.25 : [0.595335612371232, 0.6089060535243881, 0.6169749783398016, 0.6205513267849103]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.25 : [0.3093945153407548, 0.3202209349319682, 0.3306331848251654, 0.34031060094530724]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.25 : [0.7193813131313131, 0.7574888463989803, 0.7727989902177343, 0.7732433261736729]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.25 : [0.597684125488084, 0.6090615322472062, 0.617746061666891, 0.6213814460751312]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.25 : [array([1.        , 0.40393239, 0.        , ..., 1.        , 0.40393239,
       1.        ]), array([0.38966102, 0.        , 0.38966102, ..., 0.38966102, 0.24242424,
       0.38966102]), array([0.        , 0.        , 0.38788455, ..., 0.38788455, 0.38788455,
       0.38788455]), array([0.39826184, 1.        , 0.39826184, ..., 0.39826184, 0.        ,
       0.39826184])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.25 : [0.3702188586623031, 0.3984031936127744, 0.4186878727634194, 0.4234393404004711]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.25 : [0.5826641478750832, 0.5940082863561706, 0.6054366204858603, 0.6036257716097644]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.25 : [0.24572359489546566, 0.26889397817593963, 0.284325637910085, 0.2912896691424713]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.25 : [0.7504145936981758, 0.7685791297651136, 0.7938183188842819, 0.7750628817822494]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.25 : [0.5854315335936449, 0.5941833849468157, 0.606301332974283, 0.6045509627036488]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.25 : [array([0.91846999, 0.511653  , 0.74646238, ..., 0.74946662, 0.511653  ,
       0.7829968 ]), array([0.49536593, 0.22800077, 0.49536593, ..., 0.49536593, 0.24531631,
       0.52831952]), array([0.3499494 , 0.15351548, 0.49580911, ..., 0.49580911, 0.49580911,
       0.49580911]), array([0.50290624, 0.62138149, 0.50290624, ..., 0.50290624, 0.26216683,
       0.50290624])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.25 : [0.614857590290692, 0.4812511432229742, 0.4868796611730044, 0.6268012939907851]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.25 : [0.47329368042356773, 0.6180080413974445, 0.6240955005580229, 0.4885214597684239]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.25 : [0.8528373608471355, 0.35443890610265394, 0.3569596327798029, 0.863470627954085]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.25 : [0.4807162534435262, 0.749359156935346, 0.7654892877822814, 0.4919596830037701]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.25 : [0.47017638346573315, 0.6181499932678066, 0.6248148646829137, 0.4874107984381311]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.25 : [array([0.99594265, 0.46228522, 0.54526985, ..., 0.46228522, 0.46228522,
       0.46228522], dtype=float32), array([0.44879517, 0.44879517, 0.44879517, ..., 0.44879517, 0.32084212,
       0.44879517], dtype=float32), array([0.445681  , 0.31459686, 0.445681  , ..., 0.445681  , 0.445681  ,
       0.445681  ], dtype=float32), array([0.45569968, 0.45569968, 0.45569968, ..., 0.45569968, 0.45569968,
       0.45569968], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.25 : [0.3587126341006145, 0.36712443652374466, 0.3900679991757676, 0.40073831009023786]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.25 : [0.6616038667589248, 0.6911114460075253, 0.6921069521162129, 0.6983581312062178]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.25 : [0.7704697986577181, 0.8275047258979206, 0.8234014789038713, 0.8325521942905837]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.25 : [0.23377681238121098, 0.23588845480264045, 0.2555690562980964, 0.2638757596218771]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.25 : [0.5854988555271308, 0.5935774875454423, 0.601454153763296, 0.6065706207082268]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.25 : [array([0.8518938 , 0.40360404, 0.56308205, ..., 0.85372038, 0.40360404,
       0.92634006]), array([0.38919851, 0.0563929 , 0.38919851, ..., 0.38919851, 0.24078889,
       0.38919851]), array([0.14275822, 0.00233343, 0.38780444, ..., 0.38780444, 0.38780444,
       0.38780444]), array([0.39804084, 0.61906405, 0.39804084, ..., 0.39804084, 0.15249198,
       0.39804084])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.25 : [0.407885657959586, 0.4392119173474291, 0.4529569892473118, 0.4621952376434873]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.25 : [0.5930333859544082, 0.6070153825994425, 0.6155995233423885, 0.6174972844829423]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.25 : [0.7445124145376034, 0.7662642521797451, 0.7839813891658358, 0.7767857142857143]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.25 : [0.2808851479771925, 0.3078270241142395, 0.3184825165384096, 0.3289669142471303]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.25 : [0.5955971455500202, 0.6071765181096002, 0.6163996229971724, 0.6183519590682645]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.442
Logistic F1-score 47.299813780260706
Logistic ROCAUC score: 61.94069689940307
Logistic Recall score: 34.14437424384998
Logistic Precision Score: 76.94637988488337
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[6654  761]
 [4899 2540]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.58      0.90      0.70      7415
           1       0.77      0.34      0.47      7439

    accuracy                           0.62     14854
   macro avg       0.67      0.62      0.59     14854
weighted avg       0.67      0.62      0.59     14854


Logistic Accuracy Score 61.89578564696379
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.24529528617858887 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.442
DCT F1-score 43.436012049363526
DCT ROCAUC score: 60.8616948982314
DCT Recall score: 30.044360801182957
DCT Precision Score: 78.36605890603086
DCT Confusion Matrix [[6798  617]
 [5204 2235]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.92      0.70      7415
           1       0.78      0.30      0.43      7439

    accuracy                           0.61     14854
   macro avg       0.68      0.61      0.57     14854
weighted avg       0.68      0.61      0.57     14854


DCT Accuracy Score 60.81190251784031
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  2.602034091949463 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.442
Naive F1-score 48.81832283967515
Naive ROCAUC score: 62.28165750350547
Naive Recall score: 35.95913429224358
Naive Precision Score: 75.99431818181817
Naive Confusion Matrix [[6570  845]
 [4764 2675]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.58      0.89      0.70      7415
           1       0.76      0.36      0.49      7439

    accuracy                           0.62     14854
   macro avg       0.67      0.62      0.59     14854
weighted avg       0.67      0.62      0.59     14854


Naive Accuracy Score 62.23912750774202
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.023935317993164062 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.442
XGB F1-Score 38.82063882063882
XGB ROCAUC Score: 68.57642036665185
XGB Recall score: 81.40832975525977
XGB Precision Score: 25.48729667966124
XGB Confusion Matrix [[6982 5543]
 [ 433 1896]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.94      0.56      0.70     12525
           1       0.25      0.81      0.39      2329

    accuracy                           0.60     14854
   macro avg       0.60      0.69      0.54     14854
weighted avg       0.83      0.60      0.65     14854


XGB Accuracy Score 62.23912750774202
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.9344973564147949 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.25 0.442
RFC F1 score 46.239606953892675
RFC ROCAUC Score: 61.74042744780497
RFC Recall score: 77.8060413354531
RFC Precision Score: 32.894206210512166
RFC Confusion Matrix [[6717  698]
 [4992 2447]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.91      0.70      7415
           1       0.78      0.33      0.46      7439

    accuracy                           0.62     14854
   macro avg       0.68      0.62      0.58     14854
weighted avg       0.68      0.62      0.58     14854


RFC Accuracy Score 61.693819846505995
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  1652.714566230774 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.25 : [array([0.79399033, 0.46883279, 0.56018509, ..., 0.65505992, 0.46883279,
       0.62503549]), array([0.44860114, 0.30609821, 0.44860114, ..., 0.44860114, 0.2746427 ,
       0.45821607]), array([0.36632473, 0.22211775, 0.44128865, ..., 0.44128865, 0.44128865,
       0.44128865]), array([0.44886449, 0.54658915, 0.44886449, ..., 0.44886449, 0.36185029,
       0.44886449]), array([0.44136217, 0.44136217, 0.5358564 , ..., 0.44136217, 0.44136217,
       0.36416252])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.25 : [0.4326941332827036, 0.45014676640469653, 0.46312405446293503, 0.4726181545386347, 0.4729981378026071]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.25 : [0.595335612371232, 0.6089060535243881, 0.6169749783398016, 0.6205513267849103, 0.6194069689940307]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.25 : [0.3093945153407548, 0.3202209349319682, 0.3306331848251654, 0.34031060094530724, 0.3414437424384998]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.25 : [0.7193813131313131, 0.7574888463989803, 0.7727989902177343, 0.7732433261736729, 0.7694637988488336]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.25 : [0.597684125488084, 0.6090615322472062, 0.617746061666891, 0.6213814460751312, 0.6189578564696379]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.25 : [array([1.        , 0.40393239, 0.        , ..., 1.        , 0.40393239,
       1.        ]), array([0.38966102, 0.        , 0.38966102, ..., 0.38966102, 0.24242424,
       0.38966102]), array([0.        , 0.        , 0.38788455, ..., 0.38788455, 0.38788455,
       0.38788455]), array([0.39826184, 1.        , 0.39826184, ..., 0.39826184, 0.        ,
       0.39826184]), array([0.39433067, 0.39433067, 0.        , ..., 0.39433067, 0.39433067,
       0.        ])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.25 : [0.3702188586623031, 0.3984031936127744, 0.4186878727634194, 0.4234393404004711, 0.43436012049363526]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.25 : [0.5826641478750832, 0.5940082863561706, 0.6054366204858603, 0.6036257716097644, 0.608616948982314]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.25 : [0.24572359489546566, 0.26889397817593963, 0.284325637910085, 0.2912896691424713, 0.30044360801182957]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.25 : [0.7504145936981758, 0.7685791297651136, 0.7938183188842819, 0.7750628817822494, 0.7836605890603086]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.25 : [0.5854315335936449, 0.5941833849468157, 0.606301332974283, 0.6045509627036488, 0.6081190251784031]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.25 : [array([0.91846999, 0.511653  , 0.74646238, ..., 0.74946662, 0.511653  ,
       0.7829968 ]), array([0.49536593, 0.22800077, 0.49536593, ..., 0.49536593, 0.24531631,
       0.52831952]), array([0.3499494 , 0.15351548, 0.49580911, ..., 0.49580911, 0.49580911,
       0.49580911]), array([0.50290624, 0.62138149, 0.50290624, ..., 0.50290624, 0.26216683,
       0.50290624]), array([0.4999048 , 0.4999048 , 0.72044024, ..., 0.4999048 , 0.4999048 ,
       0.33872544])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.25 : [0.614857590290692, 0.4812511432229742, 0.4868796611730044, 0.6268012939907851, 0.4881832283967515]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.25 : [0.47329368042356773, 0.6180080413974445, 0.6240955005580229, 0.4885214597684239, 0.6228165750350547]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.25 : [0.8528373608471355, 0.35443890610265394, 0.3569596327798029, 0.863470627954085, 0.35959134292243583]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.25 : [0.4807162534435262, 0.749359156935346, 0.7654892877822814, 0.4919596830037701, 0.7599431818181818]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.25 : [0.47017638346573315, 0.6181499932678066, 0.6248148646829137, 0.4874107984381311, 0.6223912750774202]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.25 : [array([0.99594265, 0.46228522, 0.54526985, ..., 0.46228522, 0.46228522,
       0.46228522], dtype=float32), array([0.44879517, 0.44879517, 0.44879517, ..., 0.44879517, 0.32084212,
       0.44879517], dtype=float32), array([0.445681  , 0.31459686, 0.445681  , ..., 0.445681  , 0.445681  ,
       0.445681  ], dtype=float32), array([0.45569968, 0.45569968, 0.45569968, ..., 0.45569968, 0.45569968,
       0.45569968], dtype=float32), array([0.45091626, 0.45091626, 0.42749265, ..., 0.45091626, 0.45091626,
       0.45091626], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.25 : [0.3587126341006145, 0.36712443652374466, 0.3900679991757676, 0.40073831009023786, 0.3882063882063882]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.25 : [0.6616038667589248, 0.6911114460075253, 0.6921069521162129, 0.6983581312062178, 0.6857642036665185]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.25 : [0.7704697986577181, 0.8275047258979206, 0.8234014789038713, 0.8325521942905837, 0.8140832975525977]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.25 : [0.23377681238121098, 0.23588845480264045, 0.2555690562980964, 0.2638757596218771, 0.2548729667966124]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.25 : [0.5854988555271308, 0.5935774875454423, 0.601454153763296, 0.6065706207082268, 0.597684125488084]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.25 : [array([0.8518938 , 0.40360404, 0.56308205, ..., 0.85372038, 0.40360404,
       0.92634006]), array([0.38919851, 0.0563929 , 0.38919851, ..., 0.38919851, 0.24078889,
       0.38919851]), array([0.14275822, 0.00233343, 0.38780444, ..., 0.38780444, 0.38780444,
       0.38780444]), array([0.39804084, 0.61906405, 0.39804084, ..., 0.39804084, 0.15249198,
       0.39804084]), array([0.39430336, 0.39430336, 0.24053691, ..., 0.39430336, 0.39430336,
       0.17481661])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.25 : [0.407885657959586, 0.4392119173474291, 0.4529569892473118, 0.4621952376434873, 0.46239606953892676]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.25 : [0.5930333859544082, 0.6070153825994425, 0.6155995233423885, 0.6174972844829423, 0.6174042744780497]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.25 : [0.7445124145376034, 0.7662642521797451, 0.7839813891658358, 0.7767857142857143, 0.778060413354531]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.25 : [0.2808851479771925, 0.3078270241142395, 0.3184825165384096, 0.3289669142471303, 0.32894206210512167]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.25 : [0.5955971455500202, 0.6071765181096002, 0.6163996229971724, 0.6183519590682645, 0.6169381984650599]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.1
Logistic F1-score 44.99590946277611
Logistic ROCAUC score: 60.9127264106551
Logistic Recall score: 32.06062372486156
Logistic Precision Score: 75.42857142857143
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[9428 1075]
 [6993 3300]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.90      0.70     10503
           1       0.75      0.32      0.45     10293

    accuracy                           0.61     20796
   macro avg       0.66      0.61      0.58     20796
weighted avg       0.66      0.61      0.58     20796


Logistic Accuracy Score 61.20407770725139
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.3809239864349365 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.1
DCT F1-score 39.41257324748607
DCT ROCAUC score: 59.395294839217215
DCT Recall score: 26.464587583794813
DCT Precision Score: 77.1671388101983
DCT Confusion Matrix [[9697  806]
 [7569 2724]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.92      0.70     10503
           1       0.77      0.26      0.39     10293

    accuracy                           0.60     20796
   macro avg       0.67      0.59      0.55     20796
weighted avg       0.67      0.60      0.55     20796


DCT Accuracy Score 59.727832275437585
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  0.5764586925506592 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.1
Naive F1-score 61.71605546561554
Naive ROCAUC score: 48.06667914870085
Naive Recall score: 85.18410570290489
Naive Precision Score: 48.3858506704928
Naive Confusion Matrix [[1150 9353]
 [1525 8768]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.43      0.11      0.17     10503
           1       0.48      0.85      0.62     10293

    accuracy                           0.48     20796
   macro avg       0.46      0.48      0.40     20796
weighted avg       0.46      0.48      0.39     20796


Naive Accuracy Score 47.69186381996538
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.02593064308166504 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.1
XGB F1-Score 36.93160536369765
XGB ROCAUC Score: 68.26736322210877
XGB Recall score: 80.66099476439791
XGB Precision Score: 23.948314388419316
XGB Confusion Matrix [[9912 7828]
 [ 591 2465]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.94      0.56      0.70     17740
           1       0.24      0.81      0.37      3056

    accuracy                           0.60     20796
   macro avg       0.59      0.68      0.54     20796
weighted avg       0.84      0.60      0.65     20796


XGB Accuracy Score 47.69186381996538
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.5415518283843994 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.1
RFC F1 score 43.929998622020115
RFC ROCAUC Score: 60.568610214849436
RFC Recall score: 75.52712627339493
RFC Precision Score: 30.972505586320803
RFC Confusion Matrix [[9470 1033]
 [7105 3188]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.90      0.70     10503
           1       0.76      0.31      0.44     10293

    accuracy                           0.61     20796
   macro avg       0.66      0.61      0.57     20796
weighted avg       0.66      0.61      0.57     20796


RFC Accuracy Score 60.86747451432968
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  298.6018044948578 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.35 : [array([0.46585791, 0.46585791, 0.37481203, ..., 0.46585791, 0.53084396,
       0.46585791])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.35 : [0.4499590946277611]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.35 : [0.6091272641065509]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.35 : [0.3206062372486156]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.35 : [0.7542857142857143]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.35 : [0.6120407770725139]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.35 : [array([0.40578933, 0.40578933, 0.        , ..., 0.40578933, 0.5       ,
       0.40578933])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.35 : [0.3941257324748607]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.35 : [0.5939529483921722]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.35 : [0.26464587583794813]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.35 : [0.771671388101983]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.35 : [0.5972783227543759]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.35 : [array([0.48907267, 0.50664871, 0.3236904 , ..., 0.50664871, 0.56501466,
       0.50664871])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.35 : [0.6171605546561554]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.35 : [0.48066679148700847]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.35 : [0.8518410570290489]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.35 : [0.48385850670492797]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.35 : [0.4769186381996538]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.35 : [array([0.461848, 0.461848, 0.461848, ..., 0.461848, 0.461848, 0.461848],
      dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.35 : [0.3693160536369765]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.35 : [0.6826736322210877]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.35 : [0.8066099476439791]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.35 : [0.23948314388419314]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.35 : [0.5951625312560108]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.35 : [array([0.40593194, 0.40593194, 0.14851479, ..., 0.40593194, 0.50293795,
       0.40593194])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.35 : [0.43929998622020117]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.35 : [0.6056861021484944]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.35 : [0.7552712627339493]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.35 : [0.30972505586320803]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.35 : [0.6086747451432968]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.125
Logistic F1-score 45.40249242169081
Logistic ROCAUC score: 61.03717621095127
Logistic Recall score: 32.3976158431071
Logistic Precision Score: 75.8496511366194
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[9321 1073]
 [7032 3370]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.90      0.70     10394
           1       0.76      0.32      0.45     10402

    accuracy                           0.61     20796
   macro avg       0.66      0.61      0.58     20796
weighted avg       0.66      0.61      0.58     20796


Logistic Accuracy Score 61.02615887670706
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.15555739402770996 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.125
DCT F1-score 39.812513315815636
DCT ROCAUC score: 59.25940090782708
DCT Recall score: 26.94674101134397
DCT Precision Score: 76.1891818428921
DCT Confusion Matrix [[9518  876]
 [7599 2803]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.92      0.69     10394
           1       0.76      0.27      0.40     10402

    accuracy                           0.59     20796
   macro avg       0.66      0.59      0.55     20796
weighted avg       0.66      0.59      0.54     20796


DCT Accuracy Score 59.2469705712637
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  0.7330377101898193 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.125
Naive F1-score 62.69684012931484
Naive ROCAUC score: 48.38399273951439
Naive Recall score: 86.69486637185156
Naive Precision Score: 49.1042744350667
Naive Confusion Matrix [[1047 9347]
 [1384 9018]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.43      0.10      0.16     10394
           1       0.49      0.87      0.63     10402

    accuracy                           0.48     20796
   macro avg       0.46      0.48      0.40     20796
weighted avg       0.46      0.48      0.40     20796


Naive Accuracy Score 48.39873052510098
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.027924060821533203 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.125
XGB F1-Score 37.082653212642825
XGB ROCAUC Score: 68.32127488133574
XGB Recall score: 81.24187256176853
XGB Precision Score: 24.024226110363394
XGB Confusion Matrix [[9817 7903]
 [ 577 2499]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.94      0.55      0.70     17720
           1       0.24      0.81      0.37      3076

    accuracy                           0.59     20796
   macro avg       0.59      0.68      0.53     20796
weighted avg       0.84      0.59      0.65     20796


XGB Accuracy Score 48.39873052510098
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.5894222259521484 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.125
RFC F1 score 43.77150722642808
RFC ROCAUC Score: 60.7251987515759
RFC Recall score: 77.03488372093024
RFC Precision Score: 30.571044029994233
RFC Confusion Matrix [[9446  948]
 [7222 3180]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.91      0.70     10394
           1       0.77      0.31      0.44     10402

    accuracy                           0.61     20796
   macro avg       0.67      0.61      0.57     20796
weighted avg       0.67      0.61      0.57     20796


RFC Accuracy Score 60.71359876899404
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  400.4661514759064 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.35 : [array([0.46585791, 0.46585791, 0.37481203, ..., 0.46585791, 0.53084396,
       0.46585791]), array([0.56381914, 0.45524552, 0.65941639, ..., 0.45524552, 0.49268607,
       0.45524552])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.35 : [0.4499590946277611, 0.4540249242169081]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.35 : [0.6091272641065509, 0.6103717621095127]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.35 : [0.3206062372486156, 0.32397615843107097]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.35 : [0.7542857142857143, 0.758496511366194]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.35 : [0.6120407770725139, 0.6102615887670706]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.35 : [array([0.40578933, 0.40578933, 0.        , ..., 0.40578933, 0.5       ,
       0.40578933]), array([1.       , 0.3894467, 1.       , ..., 0.3894467, 0.5      ,
       0.3894467])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.35 : [0.3941257324748607, 0.39812513315815634]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.35 : [0.5939529483921722, 0.5925940090782708]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.35 : [0.26464587583794813, 0.2694674101134397]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.35 : [0.771671388101983, 0.761891818428921]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.35 : [0.5972783227543759, 0.592469705712637]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.35 : [array([0.48907267, 0.50664871, 0.3236904 , ..., 0.50664871, 0.56501466,
       0.50664871]), array([0.64788068, 0.50262556, 0.77073561, ..., 0.50262556, 0.49695971,
       0.50262556])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.35 : [0.6171605546561554, 0.6269684012931485]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.35 : [0.48066679148700847, 0.4838399273951439]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.35 : [0.8518410570290489, 0.8669486637185156]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.35 : [0.48385850670492797, 0.491042744350667]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.35 : [0.4769186381996538, 0.4839873052510098]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.35 : [array([0.461848, 0.461848, 0.461848, ..., 0.461848, 0.461848, 0.461848],
      dtype=float32), array([0.45261213, 0.45261213, 0.45261213, ..., 0.45261213, 0.45261213,
       0.45261213], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.35 : [0.3693160536369765, 0.37082653212642824]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.35 : [0.6826736322210877, 0.6832127488133574]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.35 : [0.8066099476439791, 0.8124187256176854]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.35 : [0.23948314388419314, 0.24024226110363392]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.35 : [0.5951625312560108, 0.5922292748605501]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.35 : [array([0.40593194, 0.40593194, 0.14851479, ..., 0.40593194, 0.50293795,
       0.40593194]), array([0.77164093, 0.38916396, 0.92236006, ..., 0.38916396, 0.48321611,
       0.38916396])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.35 : [0.43929998622020117, 0.43771507226428075]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.35 : [0.6056861021484944, 0.607251987515759]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.35 : [0.7552712627339493, 0.7703488372093024]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.35 : [0.30972505586320803, 0.3057104402999423]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.35 : [0.6086747451432968, 0.6071359876899404]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.215
Logistic F1-score 45.42080043193629
Logistic ROCAUC score: 61.12932448258931
Logistic Recall score: 32.343329488658206
Logistic Precision Score: 76.25198277815545
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[9344 1048]
 [7039 3365]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.90      0.70     10392
           1       0.76      0.32      0.45     10404

    accuracy                           0.61     20796
   macro avg       0.67      0.61      0.58     20796
weighted avg       0.67      0.61      0.58     20796


Logistic Accuracy Score 61.112713983458356
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.18548345565795898 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.215
DCT F1-score 40.662005992295626
DCT ROCAUC score: 60.02075059068594
DCT Recall score: 27.393310265282583
DCT Precision Score: 78.85998893193138
DCT Confusion Matrix [[9628  764]
 [7554 2850]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.93      0.70     10392
           1       0.79      0.27      0.41     10404

    accuracy                           0.60     20796
   macro avg       0.67      0.60      0.55     20796
weighted avg       0.67      0.60      0.55     20796


DCT Accuracy Score 60.0019234468167
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  1.2765867710113525 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.215
Naive F1-score 62.40945214150081
Naive ROCAUC score: 48.57469546710139
Naive Recall score: 85.29411764705883
Naive Precision Score: 49.20705334368415
Naive Confusion Matrix [[1232 9160]
 [1530 8874]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.45      0.12      0.19     10392
           1       0.49      0.85      0.62     10404

    accuracy                           0.49     20796
   macro avg       0.47      0.49      0.41     20796
weighted avg       0.47      0.49      0.41     20796


Naive Accuracy Score 48.59588382381227
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.02895641326904297 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.215
XGB F1-Score 37.79048184720469
XGB ROCAUC Score: 69.35537826810547
XGB Recall score: 83.03425774877651
XGB Precision Score: 24.46174548250673
XGB Confusion Matrix [[9872 7859]
 [ 520 2545]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.56      0.70     17731
           1       0.24      0.83      0.38      3065

    accuracy                           0.60     20796
   macro avg       0.60      0.69      0.54     20796
weighted avg       0.85      0.60      0.65     20796


XGB Accuracy Score 48.59588382381227
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.672166109085083 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.215
RFC F1 score 44.42917983239456
RFC ROCAUC Score: 61.115617283457325
RFC Recall score: 77.85267212325469
RFC Precision Score: 31.08419838523645
RFC Confusion Matrix [[9472  920]
 [7170 3234]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.91      0.70     10392
           1       0.78      0.31      0.44     10404

    accuracy                           0.61     20796
   macro avg       0.67      0.61      0.57     20796
weighted avg       0.67      0.61      0.57     20796


RFC Accuracy Score 61.098288132333145
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  781.1013512611389 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.35 : [array([0.46585791, 0.46585791, 0.37481203, ..., 0.46585791, 0.53084396,
       0.46585791]), array([0.56381914, 0.45524552, 0.65941639, ..., 0.45524552, 0.49268607,
       0.45524552]), array([0.4522145 , 0.61500198, 0.7656789 , ..., 0.4522145 , 0.4522145 ,
       0.58976083])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.35 : [0.4499590946277611, 0.4540249242169081, 0.4542080043193629]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.35 : [0.6091272641065509, 0.6103717621095127, 0.6112932448258931]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.35 : [0.3206062372486156, 0.32397615843107097, 0.32343329488658207]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.35 : [0.7542857142857143, 0.758496511366194, 0.7625198277815545]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.35 : [0.6120407770725139, 0.6102615887670706, 0.6111271398345836]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.35 : [array([0.40578933, 0.40578933, 0.        , ..., 0.40578933, 0.5       ,
       0.40578933]), array([1.       , 0.3894467, 1.       , ..., 0.3894467, 0.5      ,
       0.3894467]), array([0.3941678, 1.       , 1.       , ..., 0.3941678, 0.3941678,
       1.       ])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.35 : [0.3941257324748607, 0.39812513315815634, 0.40662005992295625]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.35 : [0.5939529483921722, 0.5925940090782708, 0.6002075059068595]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.35 : [0.26464587583794813, 0.2694674101134397, 0.27393310265282583]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.35 : [0.771671388101983, 0.761891818428921, 0.7885998893193138]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.35 : [0.5972783227543759, 0.592469705712637, 0.600019234468167]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.35 : [array([0.48907267, 0.50664871, 0.3236904 , ..., 0.50664871, 0.56501466,
       0.50664871]), array([0.64788068, 0.50262556, 0.77073561, ..., 0.50262556, 0.49695971,
       0.50262556]), array([0.5043839 , 0.68765829, 0.89390686, ..., 0.5043839 , 0.5043839 ,
       0.61771814])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.35 : [0.6171605546561554, 0.6269684012931485, 0.6240945214150081]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.35 : [0.48066679148700847, 0.4838399273951439, 0.4857469546710139]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.35 : [0.8518410570290489, 0.8669486637185156, 0.8529411764705882]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.35 : [0.48385850670492797, 0.491042744350667, 0.49207053343684154]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.35 : [0.4769186381996538, 0.4839873052510098, 0.4859588382381227]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.35 : [array([0.461848, 0.461848, 0.461848, ..., 0.461848, 0.461848, 0.461848],
      dtype=float32), array([0.45261213, 0.45261213, 0.45261213, ..., 0.45261213, 0.45261213,
       0.45261213], dtype=float32), array([0.4541823 , 0.5482885 , 0.8965583 , ..., 0.4541823 , 0.4541823 ,
       0.67259675], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.35 : [0.3693160536369765, 0.37082653212642824, 0.3779048184720469]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.35 : [0.6826736322210877, 0.6832127488133574, 0.6935537826810547]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.35 : [0.8066099476439791, 0.8124187256176854, 0.8303425774877651]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.35 : [0.23948314388419314, 0.24024226110363392, 0.24461745482506728]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.35 : [0.5951625312560108, 0.5922292748605501, 0.5970859780727062]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.35 : [array([0.40593194, 0.40593194, 0.14851479, ..., 0.40593194, 0.50293795,
       0.40593194]), array([0.77164093, 0.38916396, 0.92236006, ..., 0.38916396, 0.48321611,
       0.38916396]), array([0.39439996, 0.62102348, 0.82983185, ..., 0.39439996, 0.39439996,
       0.65292599])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.35 : [0.43929998622020117, 0.43771507226428075, 0.4442917983239456]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.35 : [0.6056861021484944, 0.607251987515759, 0.6111561728345732]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.35 : [0.7552712627339493, 0.7703488372093024, 0.778526721232547]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.35 : [0.30972505586320803, 0.3057104402999423, 0.3108419838523645]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.35 : [0.6086747451432968, 0.6071359876899404, 0.6109828813233315]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.269
Logistic F1-score 46.00806451612903
Logistic ROCAUC score: 61.35117577801397
Logistic Recall score: 32.93879907621247
Logistic Precision Score: 76.27005347593582
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[9339 1065]
 [6969 3423]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.90      0.70     10404
           1       0.76      0.33      0.46     10392

    accuracy                           0.61     20796
   macro avg       0.67      0.61      0.58     20796
weighted avg       0.67      0.61      0.58     20796


Logistic Accuracy Score 61.36757068667051
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.37998390197753906 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.269
DCT F1-score 41.84832451499119
DCT ROCAUC score: 60.3442182923072
DCT Recall score: 28.541185527328714
DCT Precision Score: 78.40338355802274
DCT Confusion Matrix [[9587  817]
 [7426 2966]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.92      0.70     10404
           1       0.78      0.29      0.42     10392

    accuracy                           0.60     20796
   macro avg       0.67      0.60      0.56     20796
weighted avg       0.67      0.60      0.56     20796


DCT Accuracy Score 60.3625697249471
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  1.6087288856506348 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.269
Naive F1-score 62.2259755797178
Naive ROCAUC score: 48.400663983385314
Naive Recall score: 85.08468052347959
Naive Precision Score: 49.0486492483497
Naive Confusion Matrix [[1219 9185]
 [1550 8842]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.44      0.12      0.19     10404
           1       0.49      0.85      0.62     10392

    accuracy                           0.48     20796
   macro avg       0.47      0.48      0.40     20796
weighted avg       0.47      0.48      0.40     20796


Naive Accuracy Score 48.37949605693402
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.028957843780517578 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.269
XGB F1-Score 38.429752066115704
XGB ROCAUC Score: 69.12269494790576
XGB Recall score: 82.40506329113924
XGB Precision Score: 25.057736720554274
XGB Confusion Matrix [[9848 7788]
 [ 556 2604]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.56      0.70     17636
           1       0.25      0.82      0.38      3160

    accuracy                           0.60     20796
   macro avg       0.60      0.69      0.54     20796
weighted avg       0.84      0.60      0.65     20796


XGB Accuracy Score 48.37949605693402
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.7519879341125488 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.269
RFC F1 score 45.148487751471194
RFC ROCAUC Score: 61.43699283363212
RFC Recall score: 78.13832306963523
RFC Precision Score: 31.745573518090843
RFC Confusion Matrix [[9481  923]
 [7093 3299]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.91      0.70     10404
           1       0.78      0.32      0.45     10392

    accuracy                           0.61     20796
   macro avg       0.68      0.61      0.58     20796
weighted avg       0.68      0.61      0.58     20796


RFC Accuracy Score 61.45412579342181
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  968.8868854045868 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.35 : [array([0.46585791, 0.46585791, 0.37481203, ..., 0.46585791, 0.53084396,
       0.46585791]), array([0.56381914, 0.45524552, 0.65941639, ..., 0.45524552, 0.49268607,
       0.45524552]), array([0.4522145 , 0.61500198, 0.7656789 , ..., 0.4522145 , 0.4522145 ,
       0.58976083]), array([0.43483359, 0.44724336, 0.44724336, ..., 0.44724336, 0.62308329,
       0.44724336])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.35 : [0.4499590946277611, 0.4540249242169081, 0.4542080043193629, 0.4600806451612903]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.35 : [0.6091272641065509, 0.6103717621095127, 0.6112932448258931, 0.6135117577801397]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.35 : [0.3206062372486156, 0.32397615843107097, 0.32343329488658207, 0.3293879907621247]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.35 : [0.7542857142857143, 0.758496511366194, 0.7625198277815545, 0.7627005347593583]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.35 : [0.6120407770725139, 0.6102615887670706, 0.6111271398345836, 0.6136757068667051]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.35 : [array([0.40578933, 0.40578933, 0.        , ..., 0.40578933, 0.5       ,
       0.40578933]), array([1.       , 0.3894467, 1.       , ..., 0.3894467, 0.5      ,
       0.3894467]), array([0.3941678, 1.       , 1.       , ..., 0.3941678, 0.3941678,
       1.       ]), array([0.        , 0.39562407, 0.39562407, ..., 0.39562407, 0.        ,
       0.39562407])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.35 : [0.3941257324748607, 0.39812513315815634, 0.40662005992295625, 0.4184832451499119]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.35 : [0.5939529483921722, 0.5925940090782708, 0.6002075059068595, 0.603442182923072]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.35 : [0.26464587583794813, 0.2694674101134397, 0.27393310265282583, 0.28541185527328716]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.35 : [0.771671388101983, 0.761891818428921, 0.7885998893193138, 0.7840338355802273]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.35 : [0.5972783227543759, 0.592469705712637, 0.600019234468167, 0.603625697249471]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.35 : [array([0.48907267, 0.50664871, 0.3236904 , ..., 0.50664871, 0.56501466,
       0.50664871]), array([0.64788068, 0.50262556, 0.77073561, ..., 0.50262556, 0.49695971,
       0.50262556]), array([0.5043839 , 0.68765829, 0.89390686, ..., 0.5043839 , 0.5043839 ,
       0.61771814]), array([0.49692872, 0.50031285, 0.50031285, ..., 0.50031285, 0.74993961,
       0.50031285])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.35 : [0.6171605546561554, 0.6269684012931485, 0.6240945214150081, 0.622259755797178]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.35 : [0.48066679148700847, 0.4838399273951439, 0.4857469546710139, 0.48400663983385317]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.35 : [0.8518410570290489, 0.8669486637185156, 0.8529411764705882, 0.8508468052347959]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.35 : [0.48385850670492797, 0.491042744350667, 0.49207053343684154, 0.49048649248349696]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.35 : [0.4769186381996538, 0.4839873052510098, 0.4859588382381227, 0.48379496056934024]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.35 : [array([0.461848, 0.461848, 0.461848, ..., 0.461848, 0.461848, 0.461848],
      dtype=float32), array([0.45261213, 0.45261213, 0.45261213, ..., 0.45261213, 0.45261213,
       0.45261213], dtype=float32), array([0.4541823 , 0.5482885 , 0.8965583 , ..., 0.4541823 , 0.4541823 ,
       0.67259675], dtype=float32), array([0.45073676, 0.45073676, 0.45073676, ..., 0.45073676, 0.45073676,
       0.45073676], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.35 : [0.3693160536369765, 0.37082653212642824, 0.3779048184720469, 0.384297520661157]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.35 : [0.6826736322210877, 0.6832127488133574, 0.6935537826810547, 0.6912269494790575]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.35 : [0.8066099476439791, 0.8124187256176854, 0.8303425774877651, 0.8240506329113924]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.35 : [0.23948314388419314, 0.24024226110363392, 0.24461745482506728, 0.25057736720554274]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.35 : [0.5951625312560108, 0.5922292748605501, 0.5970859780727062, 0.5987689940373149]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.35 : [array([0.40593194, 0.40593194, 0.14851479, ..., 0.40593194, 0.50293795,
       0.40593194]), array([0.77164093, 0.38916396, 0.92236006, ..., 0.38916396, 0.48321611,
       0.38916396]), array([0.39439996, 0.62102348, 0.82983185, ..., 0.39439996, 0.39439996,
       0.65292599]), array([0.08778201, 0.39561959, 0.39561959, ..., 0.39561959, 0.23916134,
       0.39561959])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.35 : [0.43929998622020117, 0.43771507226428075, 0.4442917983239456, 0.45148487751471195]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.35 : [0.6056861021484944, 0.607251987515759, 0.6111561728345732, 0.6143699283363212]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.35 : [0.7552712627339493, 0.7703488372093024, 0.778526721232547, 0.7813832306963524]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.35 : [0.30972505586320803, 0.3057104402999423, 0.3108419838523645, 0.3174557351809084]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.35 : [0.6086747451432968, 0.6071359876899404, 0.6109828813233315, 0.6145412579342181]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.33
Logistic F1-score 46.23605005072709
Logistic ROCAUC score: 61.75410110810062
Logistic Recall score: 32.89701636188643
Logistic Precision Score: 77.77019340159272
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[9429  977]
 [6972 3418]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.91      0.70     10406
           1       0.78      0.33      0.46     10390

    accuracy                           0.62     20796
   macro avg       0.68      0.62      0.58     20796
weighted avg       0.68      0.62      0.58     20796


Logistic Accuracy Score 61.77630313521831
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.3730006217956543 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.33
DCT F1-score 42.87116220384131
DCT ROCAUC score: 60.78564839230791
DCT Recall score: 29.432146294513956
DCT Precision Score: 78.89576883384933
DCT Confusion Matrix [[9588  818]
 [7332 3058]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.92      0.70     10406
           1       0.79      0.29      0.43     10390

    accuracy                           0.61     20796
   macro avg       0.68      0.61      0.57     20796
weighted avg       0.68      0.61      0.57     20796


DCT Accuracy Score 60.809771109828816
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  1.820160150527954 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.33
Naive F1-score 48.61784357395519
Naive ROCAUC score: 62.26078572793479
Naive Recall score: 35.71703561116458
Naive Precision Score: 76.10746513535686
Naive Confusion Matrix [[9241 1165]
 [6679 3711]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.58      0.89      0.70     10406
           1       0.76      0.36      0.49     10390

    accuracy                           0.62     20796
   macro avg       0.67      0.62      0.59     20796
weighted avg       0.67      0.62      0.59     20796


Naive Accuracy Score 62.28120792460089
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.028922319412231445 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.33
XGB F1-Score 38.60296832311895
XGB ROCAUC Score: 69.41551631407414
XGB Recall score: 82.90516967967015
XGB Precision Score: 25.15880654475457
XGB Confusion Matrix [[9867 7776]
 [ 539 2614]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.56      0.70     17643
           1       0.25      0.83      0.39      3153

    accuracy                           0.60     20796
   macro avg       0.60      0.69      0.54     20796
weighted avg       0.84      0.60      0.66     20796


XGB Accuracy Score 62.28120792460089
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.824758768081665 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.35 0.33
RFC F1 score 45.57688366691714
RFC ROCAUC Score: 61.667005801235945
RFC Recall score: 78.51259119792893
RFC Precision Score: 32.10779595765159
RFC Confusion Matrix [[9493  913]
 [7054 3336]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.91      0.70     10406
           1       0.79      0.32      0.46     10390

    accuracy                           0.62     20796
   macro avg       0.68      0.62      0.58     20796
weighted avg       0.68      0.62      0.58     20796


RFC Accuracy Score 61.689748028467015
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  1249.2391798496246 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.35 : [array([0.46585791, 0.46585791, 0.37481203, ..., 0.46585791, 0.53084396,
       0.46585791]), array([0.56381914, 0.45524552, 0.65941639, ..., 0.45524552, 0.49268607,
       0.45524552]), array([0.4522145 , 0.61500198, 0.7656789 , ..., 0.4522145 , 0.4522145 ,
       0.58976083]), array([0.43483359, 0.44724336, 0.44724336, ..., 0.44724336, 0.62308329,
       0.44724336]), array([0.53844161, 0.44235014, 0.44235014, ..., 0.5090682 , 0.44235014,
       0.54258664])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.35 : [0.4499590946277611, 0.4540249242169081, 0.4542080043193629, 0.4600806451612903, 0.4623605005072709]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.35 : [0.6091272641065509, 0.6103717621095127, 0.6112932448258931, 0.6135117577801397, 0.6175410110810062]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.35 : [0.3206062372486156, 0.32397615843107097, 0.32343329488658207, 0.3293879907621247, 0.3289701636188643]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.35 : [0.7542857142857143, 0.758496511366194, 0.7625198277815545, 0.7627005347593583, 0.7777019340159272]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.35 : [0.6120407770725139, 0.6102615887670706, 0.6111271398345836, 0.6136757068667051, 0.6177630313521831]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.35 : [array([0.40578933, 0.40578933, 0.        , ..., 0.40578933, 0.5       ,
       0.40578933]), array([1.       , 0.3894467, 1.       , ..., 0.3894467, 0.5      ,
       0.3894467]), array([0.3941678, 1.       , 1.       , ..., 0.3941678, 0.3941678,
       1.       ]), array([0.        , 0.39562407, 0.39562407, ..., 0.39562407, 0.        ,
       0.39562407]), array([0.        , 0.39318985, 0.39318985, ..., 0.39318985, 0.39318985,
       1.        ])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.35 : [0.3941257324748607, 0.39812513315815634, 0.40662005992295625, 0.4184832451499119, 0.42871162203841306]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.35 : [0.5939529483921722, 0.5925940090782708, 0.6002075059068595, 0.603442182923072, 0.6078564839230791]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.35 : [0.26464587583794813, 0.2694674101134397, 0.27393310265282583, 0.28541185527328716, 0.29432146294513956]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.35 : [0.771671388101983, 0.761891818428921, 0.7885998893193138, 0.7840338355802273, 0.7889576883384933]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.35 : [0.5972783227543759, 0.592469705712637, 0.600019234468167, 0.603625697249471, 0.6080977110982881]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.35 : [array([0.48907267, 0.50664871, 0.3236904 , ..., 0.50664871, 0.56501466,
       0.50664871]), array([0.64788068, 0.50262556, 0.77073561, ..., 0.50262556, 0.49695971,
       0.50262556]), array([0.5043839 , 0.68765829, 0.89390686, ..., 0.5043839 , 0.5043839 ,
       0.61771814]), array([0.49692872, 0.50031285, 0.50031285, ..., 0.50031285, 0.74993961,
       0.50031285]), array([0.58717113, 0.49864844, 0.49864844, ..., 0.55833971, 0.49864844,
       0.54810117])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.35 : [0.6171605546561554, 0.6269684012931485, 0.6240945214150081, 0.622259755797178, 0.48617843573955194]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.35 : [0.48066679148700847, 0.4838399273951439, 0.4857469546710139, 0.48400663983385317, 0.6226078572793479]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.35 : [0.8518410570290489, 0.8669486637185156, 0.8529411764705882, 0.8508468052347959, 0.3571703561116458]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.35 : [0.48385850670492797, 0.491042744350667, 0.49207053343684154, 0.49048649248349696, 0.7610746513535686]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.35 : [0.4769186381996538, 0.4839873052510098, 0.4859588382381227, 0.48379496056934024, 0.6228120792460089]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.35 : [array([0.461848, 0.461848, 0.461848, ..., 0.461848, 0.461848, 0.461848],
      dtype=float32), array([0.45261213, 0.45261213, 0.45261213, ..., 0.45261213, 0.45261213,
       0.45261213], dtype=float32), array([0.4541823 , 0.5482885 , 0.8965583 , ..., 0.4541823 , 0.4541823 ,
       0.67259675], dtype=float32), array([0.45073676, 0.45073676, 0.45073676, ..., 0.45073676, 0.45073676,
       0.45073676], dtype=float32), array([0.44907817, 0.44907817, 0.44907817, ..., 0.44907817, 0.44907817,
       0.44907817], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.35 : [0.3693160536369765, 0.37082653212642824, 0.3779048184720469, 0.384297520661157, 0.3860296832311895]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.35 : [0.6826736322210877, 0.6832127488133574, 0.6935537826810547, 0.6912269494790575, 0.6941551631407414]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.35 : [0.8066099476439791, 0.8124187256176854, 0.8303425774877651, 0.8240506329113924, 0.8290516967967015]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.35 : [0.23948314388419314, 0.24024226110363392, 0.24461745482506728, 0.25057736720554274, 0.2515880654475457]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.35 : [0.5951625312560108, 0.5922292748605501, 0.5970859780727062, 0.5987689940373149, 0.6001634929794191]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.35 : [array([0.40593194, 0.40593194, 0.14851479, ..., 0.40593194, 0.50293795,
       0.40593194]), array([0.77164093, 0.38916396, 0.92236006, ..., 0.38916396, 0.48321611,
       0.38916396]), array([0.39439996, 0.62102348, 0.82983185, ..., 0.39439996, 0.39439996,
       0.65292599]), array([0.08778201, 0.39561959, 0.39561959, ..., 0.39561959, 0.23916134,
       0.39561959]), array([0.2947441 , 0.39297442, 0.39297442, ..., 0.41910673, 0.39297442,
       0.63992714])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.35 : [0.43929998622020117, 0.43771507226428075, 0.4442917983239456, 0.45148487751471195, 0.4557688366691714]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.35 : [0.6056861021484944, 0.607251987515759, 0.6111561728345732, 0.6143699283363212, 0.6166700580123594]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.35 : [0.7552712627339493, 0.7703488372093024, 0.778526721232547, 0.7813832306963524, 0.7851259119792893]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.35 : [0.30972505586320803, 0.3057104402999423, 0.3108419838523645, 0.3174557351809084, 0.32107795957651586]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.35 : [0.6086747451432968, 0.6071359876899404, 0.6109828813233315, 0.6145412579342181, 0.6168974802846702]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.1
Logistic F1-score 44.675133055804395
Logistic ROCAUC score: 60.59622221302752
Logistic Recall score: 31.86020293122886
Logistic Precision Score: 74.73554301833568
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[12000  1433]
 [ 9066  4239]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.89      0.70     13433
           1       0.75      0.32      0.45     13305

    accuracy                           0.61     26738
   macro avg       0.66      0.61      0.57     26738
weighted avg       0.66      0.61      0.57     26738


Logistic Accuracy Score 60.73378711945545
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.1665511131286621 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.1
DCT F1-score 37.94332258611912
DCT ROCAUC score: 58.80766384019028
DCT Recall score: 25.208568207440813
DCT Precision Score: 76.6803840877915
DCT Confusion Matrix [[12413  1020]
 [ 9951  3354]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.92      0.69     13433
           1       0.77      0.25      0.38     13305

    accuracy                           0.59     26738
   macro avg       0.66      0.59      0.54     26738
weighted avg       0.66      0.59      0.54     26738


DCT Accuracy Score 58.968509237788915
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  0.6113617420196533 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.1
Naive F1-score 62.24717876029003
Naive ROCAUC score: 48.380280738570505
Naive Recall score: 85.8173618940248
Naive Precision Score: 48.83452375860742
Naive Confusion Matrix [[ 1470 11963]
 [ 1887 11418]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.44      0.11      0.18     13433
           1       0.49      0.86      0.62     13305

    accuracy                           0.48     26738
   macro avg       0.46      0.48      0.40     26738
weighted avg       0.46      0.48      0.40     26738


Naive Accuracy Score 48.201062158725414
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.03191399574279785 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.1
XGB F1-Score 35.519381660616
XGB ROCAUC Score: 67.82901232120764
XGB Recall score: 80.38695997879671
XGB Precision Score: 22.795941375422775
XGB Confusion Matrix [[12693 10272]
 [  740  3033]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.94      0.55      0.70     22965
           1       0.23      0.80      0.36      3773

    accuracy                           0.59     26738
   macro avg       0.59      0.68      0.53     26738
weighted avg       0.84      0.59      0.65     26738


XGB Accuracy Score 48.201062158725414
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.584437370300293 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.1
RFC F1 score 42.58838793383069
RFC ROCAUC Score: 60.13509613161347
RFC Recall score: 75.85210860774119
RFC Precision Score: 29.6054114994363
RFC Confusion Matrix [[12179  1254]
 [ 9366  3939]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.91      0.70     13433
           1       0.76      0.30      0.43     13305

    accuracy                           0.60     26738
   macro avg       0.66      0.60      0.56     26738
weighted avg       0.66      0.60      0.56     26738


RFC Accuracy Score 60.2812476625028
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  312.3835473060608 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.45 : [array([0.46543039, 0.46543039, 0.34470426, ..., 0.46543039, 0.46543039,
       0.46543039])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.45 : [0.44675133055804395]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.45 : [0.6059622221302752]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.45 : [0.3186020293122886]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.45 : [0.7473554301833568]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.45 : [0.6073378711945545]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.45 : [array([0.40238411, 0.40238411, 0.        , ..., 0.40238411, 0.40238411,
       0.40238411])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.45 : [0.3794332258611912]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.45 : [0.5880766384019028]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.45 : [0.2520856820744081]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.45 : [0.766803840877915]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.45 : [0.5896850923778891]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.45 : [array([0.49045408, 0.50833193, 0.38520931, ..., 0.50833193, 0.50833193,
       0.50833193])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.45 : [0.6224717876029003]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.45 : [0.483802807385705]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.45 : [0.858173618940248]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.45 : [0.4883452375860742]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.45 : [0.4820106215872541]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.45 : [array([0.46057403, 0.46057403, 0.2991374 , ..., 0.46057403, 0.46057403,
       0.46057403], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.45 : [0.35519381660615995]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.45 : [0.6782901232120764]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.45 : [0.8038695997879671]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.45 : [0.22795941375422774]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.45 : [0.588151694217967]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.45 : [array([0.4022537 , 0.4022537 , 0.13405418, ..., 0.4022537 , 0.4022537 ,
       0.4022537 ])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.45 : [0.42588387933830685]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.45 : [0.6013509613161347]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.45 : [0.7585210860774119]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.45 : [0.296054114994363]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.45 : [0.602812476625028]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.195
Logistic F1-score 46.28738757582095
Logistic ROCAUC score: 61.31370139203794
Logistic Recall score: 33.429003021148034
Logistic Precision Score: 75.22093813732155
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[12040  1458]
 [ 8814  4426]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.58      0.89      0.70     13498
           1       0.75      0.33      0.46     13240

    accuracy                           0.62     26738
   macro avg       0.66      0.61      0.58     26738
weighted avg       0.66      0.62      0.58     26738


Logistic Accuracy Score 61.58276610068067
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.2263936996459961 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.195
DCT F1-score 41.66758211578601
DCT ROCAUC score: 59.97892996567915
DCT Recall score: 28.64803625377644
DCT Precision Score: 76.37937978252114
DCT Confusion Matrix [[12325  1173]
 [ 9447  3793]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.91      0.70     13498
           1       0.76      0.29      0.42     13240

    accuracy                           0.60     26738
   macro avg       0.66      0.60      0.56     26738
weighted avg       0.66      0.60      0.56     26738


DCT Accuracy Score 60.2812476625028
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  1.129011869430542 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.195
Naive F1-score 62.46298459615854
Naive ROCAUC score: 48.69245706760182
Naive Recall score: 86.82779456193353
Naive Precision Score: 48.7759344902202
Naive Confusion Matrix [[ 1425 12073]
 [ 1744 11496]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.45      0.11      0.17     13498
           1       0.49      0.87      0.62     13240

    accuracy                           0.48     26738
   macro avg       0.47      0.49      0.40     26738
weighted avg       0.47      0.48      0.40     26738


Naive Accuracy Score 48.32448201062159
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.03391695022583008 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.195
XGB F1-Score 38.37189276077846
XGB ROCAUC Score: 68.04761333024574
XGB Recall score: 79.97128499641063
XGB Precision Score: 25.241691842900305
XGB Confusion Matrix [[12661  9898]
 [  837  3342]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.94      0.56      0.70     22559
           1       0.25      0.80      0.38      4179

    accuracy                           0.60     26738
   macro avg       0.60      0.68      0.54     26738
weighted avg       0.83      0.60      0.65     26738


XGB Accuracy Score 48.32448201062159
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.6911077499389648 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.195
RFC F1 score 45.27116930118687
RFC ROCAUC Score: 61.260467031257626
RFC Recall score: 76.64444043971886
RFC Precision Score: 32.12235649546828
RFC Confusion Matrix [[12202  1296]
 [ 8987  4253]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.58      0.90      0.70     13498
           1       0.77      0.32      0.45     13240

    accuracy                           0.62     26738
   macro avg       0.67      0.61      0.58     26738
weighted avg       0.67      0.62      0.58     26738


RFC Accuracy Score 61.54162615004862
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  685.4553229808807 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.45 : [array([0.46543039, 0.46543039, 0.34470426, ..., 0.46543039, 0.46543039,
       0.46543039]), array([0.45512136, 0.45512136, 0.45512136, ..., 0.45512136, 0.45512136,
       0.45512136])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.45 : [0.44675133055804395, 0.46287387575820954]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.45 : [0.6059622221302752, 0.6131370139203794]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.45 : [0.3186020293122886, 0.33429003021148035]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.45 : [0.7473554301833568, 0.7522093813732155]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.45 : [0.6073378711945545, 0.6158276610068067]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.45 : [array([0.40238411, 0.40238411, 0.        , ..., 0.40238411, 0.40238411,
       0.40238411]), array([0.40019326, 0.40019326, 0.40019326, ..., 0.40019326, 0.40019326,
       0.40019326])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.45 : [0.3794332258611912, 0.4166758211578601]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.45 : [0.5880766384019028, 0.5997892996567915]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.45 : [0.2520856820744081, 0.2864803625377644]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.45 : [0.766803840877915, 0.7637937978252114]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.45 : [0.5896850923778891, 0.602812476625028]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.45 : [array([0.49045408, 0.50833193, 0.38520931, ..., 0.50833193, 0.50833193,
       0.50833193]), array([0.50759537, 0.50759537, 0.50759537, ..., 0.50759537, 0.50759537,
       0.50759537])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.45 : [0.6224717876029003, 0.6246298459615854]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.45 : [0.483802807385705, 0.48692457067601824]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.45 : [0.858173618940248, 0.8682779456193354]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.45 : [0.4883452375860742, 0.487759344902202]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.45 : [0.4820106215872541, 0.4832448201062159]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.45 : [array([0.46057403, 0.46057403, 0.2991374 , ..., 0.46057403, 0.46057403,
       0.46057403], dtype=float32), array([0.45666617, 0.45666617, 0.45666617, ..., 0.45666617, 0.45666617,
       0.45666617], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.45 : [0.35519381660615995, 0.3837189276077846]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.45 : [0.6782901232120764, 0.6804761333024574]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.45 : [0.8038695997879671, 0.7997128499641063]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.45 : [0.22795941375422774, 0.25241691842900305]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.45 : [0.588151694217967, 0.5985114817862218]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.45 : [array([0.4022537 , 0.4022537 , 0.13405418, ..., 0.4022537 , 0.4022537 ,
       0.4022537 ]), array([0.4002507, 0.4002507, 0.4002507, ..., 0.4002507, 0.4002507,
       0.4002507])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.45 : [0.42588387933830685, 0.4527116930118687]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.45 : [0.6013509613161347, 0.6126046703125763]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.45 : [0.7585210860774119, 0.7664444043971886]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.45 : [0.296054114994363, 0.3212235649546828]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.45 : [0.602812476625028, 0.6154162615004862]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.215
Logistic F1-score 46.36349396961312
Logistic ROCAUC score: 61.43217633907946
Logistic Recall score: 33.385968869839836
Logistic Precision Score: 75.84557567475231
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[12025  1414]
 [ 8859  4440]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.58      0.89      0.70     13439
           1       0.76      0.33      0.46     13299

    accuracy                           0.62     26738
   macro avg       0.67      0.61      0.58     26738
weighted avg       0.67      0.62      0.58     26738


Logistic Accuracy Score 61.57902610516868
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.251328706741333 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.215
DCT F1-score 41.50505552792972
DCT ROCAUC score: 60.2371449327468
DCT Recall score: 28.242725016918563
DCT Precision Score: 78.25
DCT Confusion Matrix [[12395  1044]
 [ 9543  3756]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.92      0.70     13439
           1       0.78      0.28      0.42     13299

    accuracy                           0.60     26738
   macro avg       0.67      0.60      0.56     26738
weighted avg       0.67      0.60      0.56     26738


DCT Accuracy Score 60.40466751439898
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  1.224755048751831 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.215
Naive F1-score 62.502041482933215
Naive ROCAUC score: 48.67498221194373
Naive Recall score: 86.32979923302504
Naive Precision Score: 48.98246512223218
Naive Confusion Matrix [[ 1481 11958]
 [ 1818 11481]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.45      0.11      0.18     13439
           1       0.49      0.86      0.63     13299

    accuracy                           0.48     26738
   macro avg       0.47      0.49      0.40     26738
weighted avg       0.47      0.48      0.40     26738


Naive Accuracy Score 48.47782182661381
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.032946109771728516 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.215
XGB F1-Score 38.483729517655206
XGB ROCAUC Score: 69.40408880643521
XGB Recall score: 82.69278452764691
XGB Precision Score: 25.07707346417024
XGB Confusion Matrix [[12741  9964]
 [  698  3335]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.56      0.71     22705
           1       0.25      0.83      0.38      4033

    accuracy                           0.60     26738
   macro avg       0.60      0.69      0.54     26738
weighted avg       0.84      0.60      0.66     26738


XGB Accuracy Score 48.47782182661381
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.6801440715789795 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.215
RFC F1 score 45.45357864511327
RFC ROCAUC Score: 61.4814824637464
RFC Recall score: 77.61031414563283
RFC Precision Score: 32.13775471839988
RFC Confusion Matrix [[12206  1233]
 [ 9025  4274]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.91      0.70     13439
           1       0.78      0.32      0.45     13299

    accuracy                           0.62     26738
   macro avg       0.68      0.61      0.58     26738
weighted avg       0.67      0.62      0.58     26738


RFC Accuracy Score 61.63512603784875
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  778.3493032455444 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.45 : [array([0.46543039, 0.46543039, 0.34470426, ..., 0.46543039, 0.46543039,
       0.46543039]), array([0.45512136, 0.45512136, 0.45512136, ..., 0.45512136, 0.45512136,
       0.45512136]), array([0.45206665, 0.45206665, 0.45206665, ..., 0.31157509, 0.46787427,
       0.45206665])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.45 : [0.44675133055804395, 0.46287387575820954, 0.4636349396961312]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.45 : [0.6059622221302752, 0.6131370139203794, 0.6143217633907946]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.45 : [0.3186020293122886, 0.33429003021148035, 0.3338596886983984]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.45 : [0.7473554301833568, 0.7522093813732155, 0.7584557567475231]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.45 : [0.6073378711945545, 0.6158276610068067, 0.6157902610516868]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.45 : [array([0.40238411, 0.40238411, 0.        , ..., 0.40238411, 0.40238411,
       0.40238411]), array([0.40019326, 0.40019326, 0.40019326, ..., 0.40019326, 0.40019326,
       0.40019326]), array([0.39873103, 0.39873103, 0.39873103, ..., 0.27272727, 0.        ,
       0.39873103])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.45 : [0.3794332258611912, 0.4166758211578601, 0.4150505552792972]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.45 : [0.5880766384019028, 0.5997892996567915, 0.602371449327468]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.45 : [0.2520856820744081, 0.2864803625377644, 0.28242725016918563]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.45 : [0.766803840877915, 0.7637937978252114, 0.7825]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.45 : [0.5896850923778891, 0.602812476625028, 0.6040466751439898]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.45 : [array([0.49045408, 0.50833193, 0.38520931, ..., 0.50833193, 0.50833193,
       0.50833193]), array([0.50759537, 0.50759537, 0.50759537, ..., 0.50759537, 0.50759537,
       0.50759537]), array([0.50422734, 0.50422734, 0.50422734, ..., 0.36903988, 0.62516044,
       0.50422734])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.45 : [0.6224717876029003, 0.6246298459615854, 0.6250204148293321]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.45 : [0.483802807385705, 0.48692457067601824, 0.4867498221194373]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.45 : [0.858173618940248, 0.8682779456193354, 0.8632979923302504]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.45 : [0.4883452375860742, 0.487759344902202, 0.48982465122232177]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.45 : [0.4820106215872541, 0.4832448201062159, 0.4847782182661381]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.45 : [array([0.46057403, 0.46057403, 0.2991374 , ..., 0.46057403, 0.46057403,
       0.46057403], dtype=float32), array([0.45666617, 0.45666617, 0.45666617, ..., 0.45666617, 0.45666617,
       0.45666617], dtype=float32), array([0.45354378, 0.45354378, 0.45354378, ..., 0.35549352, 0.61173373,
       0.45354378], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.45 : [0.35519381660615995, 0.3837189276077846, 0.3848372951765521]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.45 : [0.6782901232120764, 0.6804761333024574, 0.6940408880643522]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.45 : [0.8038695997879671, 0.7997128499641063, 0.8269278452764691]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.45 : [0.22795941375422774, 0.25241691842900305, 0.2507707346417024]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.45 : [0.588151694217967, 0.5985114817862218, 0.6012416785099858]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.45 : [array([0.4022537 , 0.4022537 , 0.13405418, ..., 0.4022537 , 0.4022537 ,
       0.4022537 ]), array([0.4002507, 0.4002507, 0.4002507, ..., 0.4002507, 0.4002507,
       0.4002507]), array([0.39908918, 0.39908918, 0.39908918, ..., 0.26939086, 0.24551606,
       0.39908918])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.45 : [0.42588387933830685, 0.4527116930118687, 0.4545357864511327]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.45 : [0.6013509613161347, 0.6126046703125763, 0.6148148246374641]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.45 : [0.7585210860774119, 0.7664444043971886, 0.7761031414563283]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.45 : [0.296054114994363, 0.3212235649546828, 0.3213775471839988]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.45 : [0.602812476625028, 0.6154162615004862, 0.6163512603784875]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.285
Logistic F1-score 47.41871818842838
Logistic ROCAUC score: 62.190955789975
Logistic Recall score: 34.07988055244494
Logistic Precision Score: 77.91431984980373
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[12049  1294]
 [ 8830  4565]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.58      0.90      0.70     13343
           1       0.78      0.34      0.47     13395

    accuracy                           0.62     26738
   macro avg       0.68      0.62      0.59     26738
weighted avg       0.68      0.62      0.59     26738


Logistic Accuracy Score 62.13628543645747
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.29618000984191895 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.285
DCT F1-score 42.75907159202353
DCT ROCAUC score: 60.768818306615714
DCT Recall score: 29.29451287793953
DCT Precision Score: 79.12885662431943
DCT Confusion Matrix [[12308  1035]
 [ 9471  3924]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.92      0.70     13343
           1       0.79      0.29      0.43     13395

    accuracy                           0.61     26738
   macro avg       0.68      0.61      0.56     26738
weighted avg       0.68      0.61      0.56     26738


DCT Accuracy Score 60.707607150871425
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  1.5767767429351807 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.285
Naive F1-score 62.75938970328265
Naive ROCAUC score: 48.71546488258499
Naive Recall score: 86.13661814109741
Naive Precision Score: 49.36253957388551
Naive Confusion Matrix [[ 1507 11836]
 [ 1857 11538]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.45      0.11      0.18     13343
           1       0.49      0.86      0.63     13395

    accuracy                           0.49     26738
   macro avg       0.47      0.49      0.40     26738
weighted avg       0.47      0.49      0.40     26738


Naive Accuracy Score 48.788241454110256
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.03390908241271973 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.285
XGB F1-Score 39.225983218220215
XGB ROCAUC Score: 69.63903848478196
XGB Recall score: 83.31716779825412
XGB Precision Score: 25.65136244867488
XGB Confusion Matrix [[12655  9959]
 [  688  3436]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.56      0.70     22614
           1       0.26      0.83      0.39      4124

    accuracy                           0.60     26738
   macro avg       0.60      0.70      0.55     26738
weighted avg       0.84      0.60      0.66     26738


XGB Accuracy Score 48.788241454110256
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.7589685916900635 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.285
RFC F1 score 46.174920969441516
RFC ROCAUC Score: 61.848867857477465
RFC Recall score: 78.46016114592659
RFC Precision Score: 32.7136991414707
RFC Confusion Matrix [[12140  1203]
 [ 9013  4382]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.91      0.70     13343
           1       0.78      0.33      0.46     13395

    accuracy                           0.62     26738
   macro avg       0.68      0.62      0.58     26738
weighted avg       0.68      0.62      0.58     26738


RFC Accuracy Score 61.792205849352975
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  1049.5399420261383 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.45 : [array([0.46543039, 0.46543039, 0.34470426, ..., 0.46543039, 0.46543039,
       0.46543039]), array([0.45512136, 0.45512136, 0.45512136, ..., 0.45512136, 0.45512136,
       0.45512136]), array([0.45206665, 0.45206665, 0.45206665, ..., 0.31157509, 0.46787427,
       0.45206665]), array([0.47990893, 0.44874676, 0.44874676, ..., 0.75766866, 0.34753978,
       0.44874676])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.45 : [0.44675133055804395, 0.46287387575820954, 0.4636349396961312, 0.47418718188428377]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.45 : [0.6059622221302752, 0.6131370139203794, 0.6143217633907946, 0.62190955789975]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.45 : [0.3186020293122886, 0.33429003021148035, 0.3338596886983984, 0.3407988055244494]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.45 : [0.7473554301833568, 0.7522093813732155, 0.7584557567475231, 0.7791431984980373]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.45 : [0.6073378711945545, 0.6158276610068067, 0.6157902610516868, 0.6213628543645747]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.45 : [array([0.40238411, 0.40238411, 0.        , ..., 0.40238411, 0.40238411,
       0.40238411]), array([0.40019326, 0.40019326, 0.40019326, ..., 0.40019326, 0.40019326,
       0.40019326]), array([0.39873103, 0.39873103, 0.39873103, ..., 0.27272727, 0.        ,
       0.39873103]), array([0.39675282, 0.39675282, 0.39675282, ..., 1.        , 0.25      ,
       0.39675282])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.45 : [0.3794332258611912, 0.4166758211578601, 0.4150505552792972, 0.42759071592023534]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.45 : [0.5880766384019028, 0.5997892996567915, 0.602371449327468, 0.6076881830661571]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.45 : [0.2520856820744081, 0.2864803625377644, 0.28242725016918563, 0.29294512877939527]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.45 : [0.766803840877915, 0.7637937978252114, 0.7825, 0.7912885662431942]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.45 : [0.5896850923778891, 0.602812476625028, 0.6040466751439898, 0.6070760715087142]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.45 : [array([0.49045408, 0.50833193, 0.38520931, ..., 0.50833193, 0.50833193,
       0.50833193]), array([0.50759537, 0.50759537, 0.50759537, ..., 0.50759537, 0.50759537,
       0.50759537]), array([0.50422734, 0.50422734, 0.50422734, ..., 0.36903988, 0.62516044,
       0.50422734]), array([0.52927309, 0.45607357, 0.50014764, ..., 0.86287573, 0.35115959,
       0.50014764])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.45 : [0.6224717876029003, 0.6246298459615854, 0.6250204148293321, 0.6275938970328265]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.45 : [0.483802807385705, 0.48692457067601824, 0.4867498221194373, 0.48715464882584986]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.45 : [0.858173618940248, 0.8682779456193354, 0.8632979923302504, 0.8613661814109742]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.45 : [0.4883452375860742, 0.487759344902202, 0.48982465122232177, 0.4936253957388551]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.45 : [0.4820106215872541, 0.4832448201062159, 0.4847782182661381, 0.48788241454110254]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.45 : [array([0.46057403, 0.46057403, 0.2991374 , ..., 0.46057403, 0.46057403,
       0.46057403], dtype=float32), array([0.45666617, 0.45666617, 0.45666617, ..., 0.45666617, 0.45666617,
       0.45666617], dtype=float32), array([0.45354378, 0.45354378, 0.45354378, ..., 0.35549352, 0.61173373,
       0.45354378], dtype=float32), array([0.45266652, 0.45266652, 0.45266652, ..., 0.88207805, 0.284988  ,
       0.45266652], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.45 : [0.35519381660615995, 0.3837189276077846, 0.3848372951765521, 0.3922598321822022]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.45 : [0.6782901232120764, 0.6804761333024574, 0.6940408880643522, 0.6963903848478196]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.45 : [0.8038695997879671, 0.7997128499641063, 0.8269278452764691, 0.8331716779825412]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.45 : [0.22795941375422774, 0.25241691842900305, 0.2507707346417024, 0.2565136244867488]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.45 : [0.588151694217967, 0.5985114817862218, 0.6012416785099858, 0.6018026778367866]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.45 : [array([0.4022537 , 0.4022537 , 0.13405418, ..., 0.4022537 , 0.4022537 ,
       0.4022537 ]), array([0.4002507, 0.4002507, 0.4002507, ..., 0.4002507, 0.4002507,
       0.4002507]), array([0.39908918, 0.39908918, 0.39908918, ..., 0.26939086, 0.24551606,
       0.39908918]), array([0.47330749, 0.39674996, 0.39674996, ..., 0.88670071, 0.25523543,
       0.39674996])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.45 : [0.42588387933830685, 0.4527116930118687, 0.4545357864511327, 0.4617492096944152]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.45 : [0.6013509613161347, 0.6126046703125763, 0.6148148246374641, 0.6184886785747746]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.45 : [0.7585210860774119, 0.7664444043971886, 0.7761031414563283, 0.7846016114592659]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.45 : [0.296054114994363, 0.3212235649546828, 0.3213775471839988, 0.327136991414707]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.45 : [0.602812476625028, 0.6154162615004862, 0.6163512603784875, 0.6179220584935298]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.319
Logistic F1-score 47.589796980739195
Logistic ROCAUC score: 62.21030785369618
Logistic Recall score: 34.35808779314492
Logistic Precision Score: 77.39586860819504
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[12099  1335]
 [ 8733  4571]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.58      0.90      0.71     13434
           1       0.77      0.34      0.48     13304

    accuracy                           0.62     26738
   macro avg       0.68      0.62      0.59     26738
weighted avg       0.68      0.62      0.59     26738


Logistic Accuracy Score 62.34572518512977
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.4388265609741211 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.319
DCT F1-score 42.670171403537594
DCT ROCAUC score: 60.693277331612364
DCT Recall score: 29.284425736620566
DCT Precision Score: 78.59592495460964
DCT Confusion Matrix [[12373  1061]
 [ 9408  3896]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.92      0.70     13434
           1       0.79      0.29      0.43     13304

    accuracy                           0.61     26738
   macro avg       0.68      0.61      0.56     26738
weighted avg       0.68      0.61      0.57     26738


DCT Accuracy Score 60.84598698481562
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  1.8610191345214844 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.319
Naive F1-score 62.581086629259616
Naive ROCAUC score: 49.04982788843808
Naive Recall score: 85.92904389657245
Naive Precision Score: 49.21010718436572
Naive Confusion Matrix [[ 1635 11799]
 [ 1872 11432]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.47      0.12      0.19     13434
           1       0.49      0.86      0.63     13304

    accuracy                           0.49     26738
   macro avg       0.48      0.49      0.41     26738
weighted avg       0.48      0.49      0.41     26738


Naive Accuracy Score 48.87052135537437
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.032912254333496094 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.319
XGB F1-Score 39.235216669528874
XGB ROCAUC Score: 69.26254894816653
XGB Recall score: 82.28091236494598
XGB Precision Score: 25.759170174383645
XGB Confusion Matrix [[12696  9877]
 [  738  3427]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.56      0.71     22573
           1       0.26      0.82      0.39      4165

    accuracy                           0.60     26738
   macro avg       0.60      0.69      0.55     26738
weighted avg       0.84      0.60      0.66     26738


XGB Accuracy Score 48.87052135537437
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.7599654197692871 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.45 0.319
RFC F1 score 46.3364238410596
RFC ROCAUC Score: 61.976071005161785
RFC Recall score: 78.49578172679949
RFC Precision Score: 32.869813589897774
RFC Confusion Matrix [[12236  1198]
 [ 8931  4373]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.58      0.91      0.71     13434
           1       0.78      0.33      0.46     13304

    accuracy                           0.62     26738
   macro avg       0.68      0.62      0.59     26738
weighted avg       0.68      0.62      0.59     26738


RFC Accuracy Score 62.11758545889745
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  1203.3873753547668 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.45 : [array([0.46543039, 0.46543039, 0.34470426, ..., 0.46543039, 0.46543039,
       0.46543039]), array([0.45512136, 0.45512136, 0.45512136, ..., 0.45512136, 0.45512136,
       0.45512136]), array([0.45206665, 0.45206665, 0.45206665, ..., 0.31157509, 0.46787427,
       0.45206665]), array([0.47990893, 0.44874676, 0.44874676, ..., 0.75766866, 0.34753978,
       0.44874676]), array([0.45146677, 0.40021268, 0.45146677, ..., 0.45146677, 0.45146677,
       0.6909345 ])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.45 : [0.44675133055804395, 0.46287387575820954, 0.4636349396961312, 0.47418718188428377, 0.47589796980739196]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.45 : [0.6059622221302752, 0.6131370139203794, 0.6143217633907946, 0.62190955789975, 0.6221030785369618]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.45 : [0.3186020293122886, 0.33429003021148035, 0.3338596886983984, 0.3407988055244494, 0.3435808779314492]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.45 : [0.7473554301833568, 0.7522093813732155, 0.7584557567475231, 0.7791431984980373, 0.7739586860819505]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.45 : [0.6073378711945545, 0.6158276610068067, 0.6157902610516868, 0.6213628543645747, 0.6234572518512977]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.45 : [array([0.40238411, 0.40238411, 0.        , ..., 0.40238411, 0.40238411,
       0.40238411]), array([0.40019326, 0.40019326, 0.40019326, ..., 0.40019326, 0.40019326,
       0.40019326]), array([0.39873103, 0.39873103, 0.39873103, ..., 0.27272727, 0.        ,
       0.39873103]), array([0.39675282, 0.39675282, 0.39675282, ..., 1.        , 0.25      ,
       0.39675282]), array([0.40091173, 0.40091173, 0.40091173, ..., 0.40091173, 0.40091173,
       1.        ])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.45 : [0.3794332258611912, 0.4166758211578601, 0.4150505552792972, 0.42759071592023534, 0.42670171403537593]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.45 : [0.5880766384019028, 0.5997892996567915, 0.602371449327468, 0.6076881830661571, 0.6069327733161236]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.45 : [0.2520856820744081, 0.2864803625377644, 0.28242725016918563, 0.29294512877939527, 0.2928442573662057]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.45 : [0.766803840877915, 0.7637937978252114, 0.7825, 0.7912885662431942, 0.7859592495460964]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.45 : [0.5896850923778891, 0.602812476625028, 0.6040466751439898, 0.6070760715087142, 0.6084598698481561]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.45 : [array([0.49045408, 0.50833193, 0.38520931, ..., 0.50833193, 0.50833193,
       0.50833193]), array([0.50759537, 0.50759537, 0.50759537, ..., 0.50759537, 0.50759537,
       0.50759537]), array([0.50422734, 0.50422734, 0.50422734, ..., 0.36903988, 0.62516044,
       0.50422734]), array([0.52927309, 0.45607357, 0.50014764, ..., 0.86287573, 0.35115959,
       0.50014764]), array([0.50477497, 0.37869555, 0.50477497, ..., 0.50477497, 0.50477497,
       0.89558268])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.45 : [0.6224717876029003, 0.6246298459615854, 0.6250204148293321, 0.6275938970328265, 0.6258108662925962]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.45 : [0.483802807385705, 0.48692457067601824, 0.4867498221194373, 0.48715464882584986, 0.4904982788843808]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.45 : [0.858173618940248, 0.8682779456193354, 0.8632979923302504, 0.8613661814109742, 0.8592904389657245]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.45 : [0.4883452375860742, 0.487759344902202, 0.48982465122232177, 0.4936253957388551, 0.4921010718436572]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.45 : [0.4820106215872541, 0.4832448201062159, 0.4847782182661381, 0.48788241454110254, 0.48870521355374374]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.45 : [array([0.46057403, 0.46057403, 0.2991374 , ..., 0.46057403, 0.46057403,
       0.46057403], dtype=float32), array([0.45666617, 0.45666617, 0.45666617, ..., 0.45666617, 0.45666617,
       0.45666617], dtype=float32), array([0.45354378, 0.45354378, 0.45354378, ..., 0.35549352, 0.61173373,
       0.45354378], dtype=float32), array([0.45266652, 0.45266652, 0.45266652, ..., 0.88207805, 0.284988  ,
       0.45266652], dtype=float32), array([0.45745736, 0.45745736, 0.45745736, ..., 0.45745736, 0.45745736,
       0.45745736], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.45 : [0.35519381660615995, 0.3837189276077846, 0.3848372951765521, 0.3922598321822022, 0.3923521666952888]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.45 : [0.6782901232120764, 0.6804761333024574, 0.6940408880643522, 0.6963903848478196, 0.6926254894816652]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.45 : [0.8038695997879671, 0.7997128499641063, 0.8269278452764691, 0.8331716779825412, 0.8228091236494598]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.45 : [0.22795941375422774, 0.25241691842900305, 0.2507707346417024, 0.2565136244867488, 0.25759170174383644]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.45 : [0.588151694217967, 0.5985114817862218, 0.6012416785099858, 0.6018026778367866, 0.6029994764006283]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.45 : [array([0.4022537 , 0.4022537 , 0.13405418, ..., 0.4022537 , 0.4022537 ,
       0.4022537 ]), array([0.4002507, 0.4002507, 0.4002507, ..., 0.4002507, 0.4002507,
       0.4002507]), array([0.39908918, 0.39908918, 0.39908918, ..., 0.26939086, 0.24551606,
       0.39908918]), array([0.47330749, 0.39674996, 0.39674996, ..., 0.88670071, 0.25523543,
       0.39674996]), array([0.40073388, 0.39993016, 0.40073388, ..., 0.40073388, 0.40073388,
       0.82076836])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.45 : [0.42588387933830685, 0.4527116930118687, 0.4545357864511327, 0.4617492096944152, 0.463364238410596]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.45 : [0.6013509613161347, 0.6126046703125763, 0.6148148246374641, 0.6184886785747746, 0.6197607100516178]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.45 : [0.7585210860774119, 0.7664444043971886, 0.7761031414563283, 0.7846016114592659, 0.784957817267995]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.45 : [0.296054114994363, 0.3212235649546828, 0.3213775471839988, 0.327136991414707, 0.32869813589897773]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.45 : [0.602812476625028, 0.6154162615004862, 0.6163512603784875, 0.6179220584935298, 0.6211758545889745]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.033
Logistic F1-score 39.38297294852077
Logistic ROCAUC score: 58.99210361128504
Logistic Recall score: 26.643408005875873
Logistic Precision Score: 75.46809986130376
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[14926  1415]
 [11985  4353]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.55      0.91      0.69     16341
           1       0.75      0.27      0.39     16338

    accuracy                           0.59     32679
   macro avg       0.65      0.59      0.54     32679
weighted avg       0.65      0.59      0.54     32679


Logistic Accuracy Score 58.99507328865632
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.11269736289978027 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.033
DCT F1-score 32.33948268387843
DCT ROCAUC score: 57.01186101131497
DCT Recall score: 20.54719059860448
DCT Precision Score: 75.89871128193533
DCT Confusion Matrix [[15275  1066]
 [12981  3357]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.54      0.93      0.69     16341
           1       0.76      0.21      0.32     16338

    accuracy                           0.57     32679
   macro avg       0.65      0.57      0.50     32679
weighted avg       0.65      0.57      0.50     32679


DCT Accuracy Score 57.01520854371309
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  0.28324222564697266 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.033
Naive F1-score 60.60179402747814
Naive ROCAUC score: 46.91405071625452
Naive Recall score: 81.6685028767291
Naive Precision Score: 48.17489258764487
Naive Confusion Matrix [[ 1987 14354]
 [ 2995 13343]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.40      0.12      0.19     16341
           1       0.48      0.82      0.61     16338

    accuracy                           0.47     32679
   macro avg       0.44      0.47      0.40     32679
weighted avg       0.44      0.47      0.40     32679


Naive Accuracy Score 46.91086018544019
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.04188823699951172 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.033
XGB F1-Score 32.42954324586977
XGB ROCAUC Score: 66.47355883690189
XGB Recall score: 78.66572371522867
XGB Precision Score: 20.424776594442402
XGB Confusion Matrix [[15436 13001]
 [  905  3337]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.94      0.54      0.69     28437
           1       0.20      0.79      0.32      4242

    accuracy                           0.57     32679
   macro avg       0.57      0.66      0.51     32679
weighted avg       0.85      0.57      0.64     32679


XGB Accuracy Score 46.91086018544019
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.5355658531188965 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.033
RFC F1 score 37.88845535919211
RFC ROCAUC Score: 58.591144372721274
RFC Recall score: 75.76647695979439
RFC Precision Score: 25.260129758844414
RFC Confusion Matrix [[15021  1320]
 [12211  4127]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.55      0.92      0.69     16341
           1       0.76      0.25      0.38     16338

    accuracy                           0.59     32679
   macro avg       0.65      0.59      0.53     32679
weighted avg       0.65      0.59      0.53     32679


RFC Accuracy Score 58.59420422901558
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  104.08544039726257 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.55 : [array([0.47131388, 0.47131388, 0.47131388, ..., 0.52169293, 0.47131388,
       0.47131388])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.55 : [0.39382972948520767]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5899210361128504]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.55 : [0.26643408005875874]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.55 : [0.7546809986130375]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5899507328865632]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.55 : [array([0.39736191, 0.39736191, 0.39736191, ..., 0.        , 0.39736191,
       0.39736191])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.55 : [0.3233948268387843]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5701186101131497]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.55 : [0.2054719059860448]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.55 : [0.7589871128193534]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5701520854371309]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.55 : [array([0.50357143, 0.50357143, 0.50357143, ..., 0.6658697 , 0.50357143,
       0.50357143])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.55 : [0.6060179402747814]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.55 : [0.4691405071625452]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.55 : [0.816685028767291]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.55 : [0.4817489258764487]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.55 : [0.4691086018544019]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.55 : [array([0.45536032, 0.45536032, 0.45536032, ..., 0.30854404, 0.45536032,
       0.45536032], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.55 : [0.32429543245869774]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.55 : [0.6647355883690188]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.55 : [0.7866572371522866]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.55 : [0.20424776594442404]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5744667829492947]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.55 : [array([0.39715608, 0.39715608, 0.39715608, ..., 0.3384132 , 0.39715608,
       0.39715608])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.55 : [0.3788845535919211]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5859114437272127]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.55 : [0.7576647695979438]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.55 : [0.25260129758844413]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5859420422901558]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.125
Logistic F1-score 43.990949438691146
Logistic ROCAUC score: 60.52503851605135
Logistic Recall score: 31.02749815860545
Logistic Precision Score: 75.56053811659193
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[14752  1635]
 [11237  5055]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.90      0.70     16387
           1       0.76      0.31      0.44     16292

    accuracy                           0.61     32679
   macro avg       0.66      0.61      0.57     32679
weighted avg       0.66      0.61      0.57     32679


Logistic Accuracy Score 60.61078980384956
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.2782552242279053 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.125
DCT F1-score 38.256434036633436
DCT ROCAUC score: 59.15681093642058
DCT Recall score: 25.31917505524184
DCT Precision Score: 78.22871230798407
DCT Confusion Matrix [[15239  1148]
 [12167  4125]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.93      0.70     16387
           1       0.78      0.25      0.38     16292

    accuracy                           0.59     32679
   macro avg       0.67      0.59      0.54     32679
weighted avg       0.67      0.59      0.54     32679


DCT Accuracy Score 59.25517916704918
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  0.7679769992828369 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.125
Naive F1-score 61.83587880418937
Naive ROCAUC score: 48.03315831651179
Naive Recall score: 84.61821753007611
Naive Precision Score: 48.71894547125137
Naive Confusion Matrix [[ 1876 14511]
 [ 2506 13786]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.43      0.11      0.18     16387
           1       0.49      0.85      0.62     16292

    accuracy                           0.48     32679
   macro avg       0.46      0.48      0.40     32679
weighted avg       0.46      0.48      0.40     32679


Naive Accuracy Score 47.926803145751094
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.03793025016784668 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.125
XGB F1-Score 35.39449717189148
XGB ROCAUC Score: 67.98112272068728
XGB Recall score: 80.78774617067833
XGB Precision Score: 22.66142892217039
XGB Confusion Matrix [[15509 12600]
 [  878  3692]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.55      0.70     28109
           1       0.23      0.81      0.35      4570

    accuracy                           0.59     32679
   macro avg       0.59      0.68      0.53     32679
weighted avg       0.85      0.59      0.65     32679


XGB Accuracy Score 47.926803145751094
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.6123607158660889 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.125
RFC F1 score 42.528224731087214
RFC ROCAUC Score: 60.34324739070036
RFC Recall score: 77.08669029970996
RFC Precision Score: 29.364105082248958
RFC Confusion Matrix [[14965  1422]
 [11508  4784]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.91      0.70     16387
           1       0.77      0.29      0.43     16292

    accuracy                           0.60     32679
   macro avg       0.67      0.60      0.56     32679
weighted avg       0.67      0.60      0.56     32679


RFC Accuracy Score 60.43330579271091
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  431.24998450279236 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.55 : [array([0.47131388, 0.47131388, 0.47131388, ..., 0.52169293, 0.47131388,
       0.47131388]), array([0.45783213, 0.45783213, 0.36101714, ..., 0.45783213, 0.45783213,
       0.45783213])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.55 : [0.39382972948520767, 0.43990949438691146]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5899210361128504, 0.6052503851605135]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.55 : [0.26643408005875874, 0.3102749815860545]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.55 : [0.7546809986130375, 0.7556053811659192]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5899507328865632, 0.6061078980384956]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.55 : [array([0.39736191, 0.39736191, 0.39736191, ..., 0.        , 0.39736191,
       0.39736191]), array([0.3957492, 0.3957492, 0.3957492, ..., 0.3957492, 0.3957492,
       0.3957492])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.55 : [0.3233948268387843, 0.38256434036633435]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5701186101131497, 0.5915681093642058]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.55 : [0.2054719059860448, 0.2531917505524184]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.55 : [0.7589871128193534, 0.7822871230798407]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5701520854371309, 0.5925517916704918]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.55 : [array([0.50357143, 0.50357143, 0.50357143, ..., 0.6658697 , 0.50357143,
       0.50357143]), array([0.50127912, 0.50127912, 0.32607684, ..., 0.50127912, 0.50127912,
       0.50127912])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.55 : [0.6060179402747814, 0.6183587880418937]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.55 : [0.4691405071625452, 0.48033158316511787]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.55 : [0.816685028767291, 0.8461821753007611]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.55 : [0.4817489258764487, 0.4871894547125137]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.55 : [0.4691086018544019, 0.47926803145751096]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.55 : [array([0.45536032, 0.45536032, 0.45536032, ..., 0.30854404, 0.45536032,
       0.45536032], dtype=float32), array([0.45475426, 0.45475426, 0.45475426, ..., 0.45475426, 0.45475426,
       0.45475426], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.55 : [0.32429543245869774, 0.3539449717189148]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.55 : [0.6647355883690188, 0.6798112272068728]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.55 : [0.7866572371522866, 0.8078774617067833]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.55 : [0.20424776594442404, 0.2266142892217039]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5744667829492947, 0.5875638789436641]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.55 : [array([0.39715608, 0.39715608, 0.39715608, ..., 0.3384132 , 0.39715608,
       0.39715608]), array([0.39560489, 0.39560489, 0.32249806, ..., 0.39560489, 0.39560489,
       0.39560489])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.55 : [0.3788845535919211, 0.4252822473108721]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5859114437272127, 0.6034324739070036]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.55 : [0.7576647695979438, 0.7708669029970996]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.55 : [0.25260129758844413, 0.2936410508224896]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5859420422901558, 0.6043330579271091]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.189
Logistic F1-score 45.52845528455285
Logistic ROCAUC score: 61.19249107233182
Logistic Recall score: 32.39359434938805
Logistic Precision Score: 76.57981862674535
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[14629  1627]
 [11103  5320]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.90      0.70     16256
           1       0.77      0.32      0.46     16423

    accuracy                           0.61     32679
   macro avg       0.67      0.61      0.58     32679
weighted avg       0.67      0.61      0.58     32679


Logistic Accuracy Score 61.0453196242235
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.4656863212585449 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.189
DCT F1-score 40.47383118637961
DCT ROCAUC score: 59.72352418839816
DCT Recall score: 27.357973573646717
DCT Precision Score: 77.7470150545077
DCT Confusion Matrix [[14970  1286]
 [11930  4493]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.92      0.69     16256
           1       0.78      0.27      0.40     16423

    accuracy                           0.60     32679
   macro avg       0.67      0.60      0.55     32679
weighted avg       0.67      0.60      0.55     32679


DCT Accuracy Score 59.55812601364791
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  1.2136595249176025 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.189
Naive F1-score 48.041125989801415
Naive ROCAUC score: 61.78359605623187
Naive Recall score: 35.2797905376606
Naive Precision Score: 75.26630293582748
Naive Confusion Matrix [[14352  1904]
 [10629  5794]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.88      0.70     16256
           1       0.75      0.35      0.48     16423

    accuracy                           0.62     32679
   macro avg       0.66      0.62      0.59     32679
weighted avg       0.66      0.62      0.59     32679


Naive Accuracy Score 61.64815324826341
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.04288434982299805 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.189
XGB F1-Score 38.214002148428385
XGB ROCAUC Score: 68.74125759248797
XGB Recall score: 82.01684041700081
XGB Precision Score: 24.910186932959874
XGB Confusion Matrix [[15359 12332]
 [  897  4091]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.94      0.55      0.70     27691
           1       0.25      0.82      0.38      4988

    accuracy                           0.60     32679
   macro avg       0.60      0.69      0.54     32679
weighted avg       0.84      0.60      0.65     32679


XGB Accuracy Score 61.64815324826341
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.782905101776123 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.189
RFC F1 score 44.760013812154696
RFC ROCAUC Score: 60.987559877375745
RFC Recall score: 76.87175685693106
RFC Precision Score: 31.57157644766486
RFC Confusion Matrix [[14696  1560]
 [11238  5185]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.90      0.70     16256
           1       0.77      0.32      0.45     16423

    accuracy                           0.61     32679
   macro avg       0.67      0.61      0.57     32679
weighted avg       0.67      0.61      0.57     32679


RFC Accuracy Score 60.83723492150923
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  705.6340186595917 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.55 : [array([0.47131388, 0.47131388, 0.47131388, ..., 0.52169293, 0.47131388,
       0.47131388]), array([0.45783213, 0.45783213, 0.36101714, ..., 0.45783213, 0.45783213,
       0.45783213]), array([0.57024558, 0.66951555, 0.4499205 , ..., 0.4499205 , 0.4499205 ,
       0.4499205 ])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.55 : [0.39382972948520767, 0.43990949438691146, 0.4552845528455285]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5899210361128504, 0.6052503851605135, 0.6119249107233182]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.55 : [0.26643408005875874, 0.3102749815860545, 0.32393594349388055]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.55 : [0.7546809986130375, 0.7556053811659192, 0.7657981862674536]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5899507328865632, 0.6061078980384956, 0.610453196242235]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.55 : [array([0.39736191, 0.39736191, 0.39736191, ..., 0.        , 0.39736191,
       0.39736191]), array([0.3957492, 0.3957492, 0.3957492, ..., 0.3957492, 0.3957492,
       0.3957492]), array([1.        , 1.        , 0.39078185, ..., 0.39078185, 0.39078185,
       0.39078185])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.55 : [0.3233948268387843, 0.38256434036633435, 0.4047383118637961]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5701186101131497, 0.5915681093642058, 0.5972352418839816]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.55 : [0.2054719059860448, 0.2531917505524184, 0.27357973573646716]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.55 : [0.7589871128193534, 0.7822871230798407, 0.777470150545077]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5701520854371309, 0.5925517916704918, 0.595581260136479]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.55 : [array([0.50357143, 0.50357143, 0.50357143, ..., 0.6658697 , 0.50357143,
       0.50357143]), array([0.50127912, 0.50127912, 0.32607684, ..., 0.50127912, 0.50127912,
       0.50127912]), array([0.71905359, 0.87007726, 0.49977736, ..., 0.49977736, 0.49977736,
       0.49977736])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.55 : [0.6060179402747814, 0.6183587880418937, 0.48041125989801414]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.55 : [0.4691405071625452, 0.48033158316511787, 0.6178359605623187]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.55 : [0.816685028767291, 0.8461821753007611, 0.352797905376606]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.55 : [0.4817489258764487, 0.4871894547125137, 0.7526630293582749]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.55 : [0.4691086018544019, 0.47926803145751096, 0.6164815324826342]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.55 : [array([0.45536032, 0.45536032, 0.45536032, ..., 0.30854404, 0.45536032,
       0.45536032], dtype=float32), array([0.45475426, 0.45475426, 0.45475426, ..., 0.45475426, 0.45475426,
       0.45475426], dtype=float32), array([0.8159366 , 0.836231  , 0.45266545, ..., 0.45266545, 0.45266545,
       0.45266545], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.55 : [0.32429543245869774, 0.3539449717189148, 0.38214002148428383]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.55 : [0.6647355883690188, 0.6798112272068728, 0.6874125759248797]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.55 : [0.7866572371522866, 0.8078774617067833, 0.820168404170008]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.55 : [0.20424776594442404, 0.2266142892217039, 0.24910186932959874]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5744667829492947, 0.5875638789436641, 0.5951834511459959]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.55 : [array([0.39715608, 0.39715608, 0.39715608, ..., 0.3384132 , 0.39715608,
       0.39715608]), array([0.39560489, 0.39560489, 0.32249806, ..., 0.39560489, 0.39560489,
       0.39560489]), array([0.7283015 , 0.82179356, 0.39040421, ..., 0.39040421, 0.39040421,
       0.39040421])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.55 : [0.3788845535919211, 0.4252822473108721, 0.447600138121547]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5859114437272127, 0.6034324739070036, 0.6098755987737574]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.55 : [0.7576647695979438, 0.7708669029970996, 0.7687175685693106]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.55 : [0.25260129758844413, 0.2936410508224896, 0.3157157644766486]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5859420422901558, 0.6043330579271091, 0.6083723492150923]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.225
Logistic F1-score 45.842062508016596
Logistic ROCAUC score: 61.24593788640645
Logistic Recall score: 32.80102790014684
Logistic Precision Score: 76.09652235628104
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[14651  1684]
 [10983  5361]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.90      0.70     16335
           1       0.76      0.33      0.46     16344

    accuracy                           0.61     32679
   macro avg       0.67      0.61      0.58     32679
weighted avg       0.67      0.61      0.58     32679


Logistic Accuracy Score 61.23810398114997
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.16957783699035645 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.225
DCT F1-score 40.136332651670074
DCT ROCAUC score: 59.69870915806037
DCT Recall score: 27.019089574155654
DCT Precision Score: 78.00741918388977
DCT Confusion Matrix [[15090  1245]
 [11928  4416]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.92      0.70     16335
           1       0.78      0.27      0.40     16344

    accuracy                           0.60     32679
   macro avg       0.67      0.60      0.55     32679
weighted avg       0.67      0.60      0.55     32679


DCT Accuracy Score 59.68970898742312
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  1.3453655242919922 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.225
Naive F1-score 62.560951172266385
Naive ROCAUC score: 48.534630445423396
Naive Recall score: 85.95814977973568
Naive Precision Score: 49.17567993279429
Naive Confusion Matrix [[ 1815 14520]
 [ 2295 14049]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.44      0.11      0.18     16335
           1       0.49      0.86      0.63     16344

    accuracy                           0.49     32679
   macro avg       0.47      0.49      0.40     32679
weighted avg       0.47      0.49      0.40     32679


Naive Accuracy Score 48.54493711557881
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.041887760162353516 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.225
XGB F1-Score 37.57323757323757
XGB ROCAUC Score: 69.04731875200234
XGB Recall score: 82.48962655601659
XGB Precision Score: 24.326970141948117
XGB Confusion Matrix [[15491 12368]
 [  844  3976]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.56      0.70     27859
           1       0.24      0.82      0.38      4820

    accuracy                           0.60     32679
   macro avg       0.60      0.69      0.54     32679
weighted avg       0.84      0.60      0.65     32679


XGB Accuracy Score 48.54493711557881
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.7160835266113281 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.225
RFC F1 score 44.50376334675302
RFC ROCAUC Score: 61.20048940883943
RFC Recall score: 78.13460356484327
RFC Precision Score: 31.112334801762113
RFC Confusion Matrix [[14912  1423]
 [11259  5085]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.91      0.70     16335
           1       0.78      0.31      0.45     16344

    accuracy                           0.61     32679
   macro avg       0.68      0.61      0.57     32679
weighted avg       0.68      0.61      0.57     32679


RFC Accuracy Score 61.19220294378653
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  872.3411412239075 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.55 : [array([0.47131388, 0.47131388, 0.47131388, ..., 0.52169293, 0.47131388,
       0.47131388]), array([0.45783213, 0.45783213, 0.36101714, ..., 0.45783213, 0.45783213,
       0.45783213]), array([0.57024558, 0.66951555, 0.4499205 , ..., 0.4499205 , 0.4499205 ,
       0.4499205 ]), array([0.52232942, 0.45235175, 0.45235175, ..., 0.45235175, 0.68056282,
       0.28484048])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.55 : [0.39382972948520767, 0.43990949438691146, 0.4552845528455285, 0.45842062508016596]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5899210361128504, 0.6052503851605135, 0.6119249107233182, 0.6124593788640645]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.55 : [0.26643408005875874, 0.3102749815860545, 0.32393594349388055, 0.32801027900146845]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.55 : [0.7546809986130375, 0.7556053811659192, 0.7657981862674536, 0.7609652235628105]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5899507328865632, 0.6061078980384956, 0.610453196242235, 0.6123810398114997]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.55 : [array([0.39736191, 0.39736191, 0.39736191, ..., 0.        , 0.39736191,
       0.39736191]), array([0.3957492, 0.3957492, 0.3957492, ..., 0.3957492, 0.3957492,
       0.3957492]), array([1.        , 1.        , 0.39078185, ..., 0.39078185, 0.39078185,
       0.39078185]), array([0.39691511, 0.39691511, 0.39691511, ..., 0.39691511, 0.71428571,
       0.27586207])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.55 : [0.3233948268387843, 0.38256434036633435, 0.4047383118637961, 0.40136332651670076]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5701186101131497, 0.5915681093642058, 0.5972352418839816, 0.5969870915806037]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.55 : [0.2054719059860448, 0.2531917505524184, 0.27357973573646716, 0.2701908957415565]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.55 : [0.7589871128193534, 0.7822871230798407, 0.777470150545077, 0.7800741918388977]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5701520854371309, 0.5925517916704918, 0.595581260136479, 0.5968970898742312]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.55 : [array([0.50357143, 0.50357143, 0.50357143, ..., 0.6658697 , 0.50357143,
       0.50357143]), array([0.50127912, 0.50127912, 0.32607684, ..., 0.50127912, 0.50127912,
       0.50127912]), array([0.71905359, 0.87007726, 0.49977736, ..., 0.49977736, 0.49977736,
       0.49977736]), array([0.60071268, 0.50351586, 0.50351586, ..., 0.50351586, 0.72383564,
       0.16249103])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.55 : [0.6060179402747814, 0.6183587880418937, 0.48041125989801414, 0.6256095117226639]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.55 : [0.4691405071625452, 0.48033158316511787, 0.6178359605623187, 0.485346304454234]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.55 : [0.816685028767291, 0.8461821753007611, 0.352797905376606, 0.8595814977973568]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.55 : [0.4817489258764487, 0.4871894547125137, 0.7526630293582749, 0.49175679932794286]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.55 : [0.4691086018544019, 0.47926803145751096, 0.6164815324826342, 0.4854493711557881]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.55 : [array([0.45536032, 0.45536032, 0.45536032, ..., 0.30854404, 0.45536032,
       0.45536032], dtype=float32), array([0.45475426, 0.45475426, 0.45475426, ..., 0.45475426, 0.45475426,
       0.45475426], dtype=float32), array([0.8159366 , 0.836231  , 0.45266545, ..., 0.45266545, 0.45266545,
       0.45266545], dtype=float32), array([0.4558293, 0.4558293, 0.4558293, ..., 0.4558293, 0.5802155,
       0.3285247], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.55 : [0.32429543245869774, 0.3539449717189148, 0.38214002148428383, 0.3757323757323757]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.55 : [0.6647355883690188, 0.6798112272068728, 0.6874125759248797, 0.6904731875200234]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.55 : [0.7866572371522866, 0.8078774617067833, 0.820168404170008, 0.8248962655601659]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.55 : [0.20424776594442404, 0.2266142892217039, 0.24910186932959874, 0.24326970141948115]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5744667829492947, 0.5875638789436641, 0.5951834511459959, 0.5957036629027816]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.55 : [array([0.39715608, 0.39715608, 0.39715608, ..., 0.3384132 , 0.39715608,
       0.39715608]), array([0.39560489, 0.39560489, 0.32249806, ..., 0.39560489, 0.39560489,
       0.39560489]), array([0.7283015 , 0.82179356, 0.39040421, ..., 0.39040421, 0.39040421,
       0.39040421]), array([0.49598307, 0.39701251, 0.39701251, ..., 0.39701251, 0.71655536,
       0.27233338])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.55 : [0.3788845535919211, 0.4252822473108721, 0.447600138121547, 0.44503763346753017]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5859114437272127, 0.6034324739070036, 0.6098755987737574, 0.6120048940883943]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.55 : [0.7576647695979438, 0.7708669029970996, 0.7687175685693106, 0.7813460356484327]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.55 : [0.25260129758844413, 0.2936410508224896, 0.3157157644766486, 0.31112334801762115]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5859420422901558, 0.6043330579271091, 0.6083723492150923, 0.6119220294378653]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.286
Logistic F1-score 46.91316432241219
Logistic ROCAUC score: 61.64355822408601
Logistic Recall score: 33.82317221277629
Logistic Precision Score: 76.53201428964002
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[14503  1708]
 [10898  5570]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.89      0.70     16211
           1       0.77      0.34      0.47     16468

    accuracy                           0.61     32679
   macro avg       0.67      0.62      0.58     32679
weighted avg       0.67      0.61      0.58     32679


Logistic Accuracy Score 61.42476819976132
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.2901885509490967 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.286
DCT F1-score 42.82568484101119
DCT ROCAUC score: 60.51793076388321
DCT Recall score: 29.523925188243865
DCT Precision Score: 77.94164796409106
DCT Confusion Matrix [[14835  1376]
 [11606  4862]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.92      0.70     16211
           1       0.78      0.30      0.43     16468

    accuracy                           0.60     32679
   macro avg       0.67      0.61      0.56     32679
weighted avg       0.67      0.60      0.56     32679


DCT Accuracy Score 60.27418219651764
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  1.7243897914886475 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.286
Naive F1-score 48.92369510845054
Naive ROCAUC score: 62.08406163095085
Naive Recall score: 36.22783580276901
Naive Precision Score: 75.31877288221183
Naive Confusion Matrix [[14256  1955]
 [10502  5966]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.58      0.88      0.70     16211
           1       0.75      0.36      0.49     16468

    accuracy                           0.62     32679
   macro avg       0.66      0.62      0.59     32679
weighted avg       0.67      0.62      0.59     32679


Naive Accuracy Score 61.880718504238196
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.04291796684265137 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.286
XGB F1-Score 39.03571926239026
XGB ROCAUC Score: 69.30700290262834
XGB Recall score: 83.02706974906145
XGB Precision Score: 25.51615253825601
XGB Confusion Matrix [[15352 12266]
 [  859  4202]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.56      0.70     27618
           1       0.26      0.83      0.39      5061

    accuracy                           0.60     32679
   macro avg       0.60      0.69      0.55     32679
weighted avg       0.84      0.60      0.65     32679


XGB Accuracy Score 61.880718504238196
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.8496885299682617 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.55 0.286
RFC F1 score 46.17026727008795
RFC ROCAUC Score: 61.645235424382136
RFC Recall score: 77.7538107563992
RFC Precision Score: 32.83337381588535
RFC Confusion Matrix [[14664  1547]
 [11061  5407]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.90      0.70     16211
           1       0.78      0.33      0.46     16468

    accuracy                           0.61     32679
   macro avg       0.67      0.62      0.58     32679
weighted avg       0.67      0.61      0.58     32679


RFC Accuracy Score 61.41864806144619
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  1136.5541505813599 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.55 : [array([0.47131388, 0.47131388, 0.47131388, ..., 0.52169293, 0.47131388,
       0.47131388]), array([0.45783213, 0.45783213, 0.36101714, ..., 0.45783213, 0.45783213,
       0.45783213]), array([0.57024558, 0.66951555, 0.4499205 , ..., 0.4499205 , 0.4499205 ,
       0.4499205 ]), array([0.52232942, 0.45235175, 0.45235175, ..., 0.45235175, 0.68056282,
       0.28484048]), array([0.44527281, 0.44527281, 0.55587953, ..., 0.44527281, 0.83072839,
       0.89269133])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.55 : [0.39382972948520767, 0.43990949438691146, 0.4552845528455285, 0.45842062508016596, 0.46913164322412193]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5899210361128504, 0.6052503851605135, 0.6119249107233182, 0.6124593788640645, 0.61643558224086]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.55 : [0.26643408005875874, 0.3102749815860545, 0.32393594349388055, 0.32801027900146845, 0.3382317221277629]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.55 : [0.7546809986130375, 0.7556053811659192, 0.7657981862674536, 0.7609652235628105, 0.7653201428964002]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5899507328865632, 0.6061078980384956, 0.610453196242235, 0.6123810398114997, 0.6142476819976131]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.55 : [array([0.39736191, 0.39736191, 0.39736191, ..., 0.        , 0.39736191,
       0.39736191]), array([0.3957492, 0.3957492, 0.3957492, ..., 0.3957492, 0.3957492,
       0.3957492]), array([1.        , 1.        , 0.39078185, ..., 0.39078185, 0.39078185,
       0.39078185]), array([0.39691511, 0.39691511, 0.39691511, ..., 0.39691511, 0.71428571,
       0.27586207]), array([0.39396449, 0.39396449, 1.        , ..., 0.39396449, 1.        ,
       1.        ])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.55 : [0.3233948268387843, 0.38256434036633435, 0.4047383118637961, 0.40136332651670076, 0.4282568484101119]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5701186101131497, 0.5915681093642058, 0.5972352418839816, 0.5969870915806037, 0.6051793076388321]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.55 : [0.2054719059860448, 0.2531917505524184, 0.27357973573646716, 0.2701908957415565, 0.29523925188243866]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.55 : [0.7589871128193534, 0.7822871230798407, 0.777470150545077, 0.7800741918388977, 0.7794164796409105]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5701520854371309, 0.5925517916704918, 0.595581260136479, 0.5968970898742312, 0.6027418219651764]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.55 : [array([0.50357143, 0.50357143, 0.50357143, ..., 0.6658697 , 0.50357143,
       0.50357143]), array([0.50127912, 0.50127912, 0.32607684, ..., 0.50127912, 0.50127912,
       0.50127912]), array([0.71905359, 0.87007726, 0.49977736, ..., 0.49977736, 0.49977736,
       0.49977736]), array([0.60071268, 0.50351586, 0.50351586, ..., 0.50351586, 0.72383564,
       0.16249103]), array([0.49841102, 0.49841102, 0.62088111, ..., 0.49841102, 0.97212422,
       0.95566898])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.55 : [0.6060179402747814, 0.6183587880418937, 0.48041125989801414, 0.6256095117226639, 0.4892369510845054]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.55 : [0.4691405071625452, 0.48033158316511787, 0.6178359605623187, 0.485346304454234, 0.6208406163095085]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.55 : [0.816685028767291, 0.8461821753007611, 0.352797905376606, 0.8595814977973568, 0.36227835802769004]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.55 : [0.4817489258764487, 0.4871894547125137, 0.7526630293582749, 0.49175679932794286, 0.7531877288221184]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.55 : [0.4691086018544019, 0.47926803145751096, 0.6164815324826342, 0.4854493711557881, 0.618807185042382]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.55 : [array([0.45536032, 0.45536032, 0.45536032, ..., 0.30854404, 0.45536032,
       0.45536032], dtype=float32), array([0.45475426, 0.45475426, 0.45475426, ..., 0.45475426, 0.45475426,
       0.45475426], dtype=float32), array([0.8159366 , 0.836231  , 0.45266545, ..., 0.45266545, 0.45266545,
       0.45266545], dtype=float32), array([0.4558293, 0.4558293, 0.4558293, ..., 0.4558293, 0.5802155,
       0.3285247], dtype=float32), array([0.44964385, 0.44964385, 0.44964385, ..., 0.44964385, 0.9927019 ,
       0.99809235], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.55 : [0.32429543245869774, 0.3539449717189148, 0.38214002148428383, 0.3757323757323757, 0.3903571926239026]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.55 : [0.6647355883690188, 0.6798112272068728, 0.6874125759248797, 0.6904731875200234, 0.6930700290262835]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.55 : [0.7866572371522866, 0.8078774617067833, 0.820168404170008, 0.8248962655601659, 0.8302706974906146]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.55 : [0.20424776594442404, 0.2266142892217039, 0.24910186932959874, 0.24326970141948115, 0.2551615253825601]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5744667829492947, 0.5875638789436641, 0.5951834511459959, 0.5957036629027816, 0.5983659230698614]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.55 : [array([0.39715608, 0.39715608, 0.39715608, ..., 0.3384132 , 0.39715608,
       0.39715608]), array([0.39560489, 0.39560489, 0.32249806, ..., 0.39560489, 0.39560489,
       0.39560489]), array([0.7283015 , 0.82179356, 0.39040421, ..., 0.39040421, 0.39040421,
       0.39040421]), array([0.49598307, 0.39701251, 0.39701251, ..., 0.39701251, 0.71655536,
       0.27233338]), array([0.3940271 , 0.3940271 , 0.76986815, ..., 0.3940271 , 0.90160418,
       0.92656515])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.55 : [0.3788845535919211, 0.4252822473108721, 0.447600138121547, 0.44503763346753017, 0.4617026727008795]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5859114437272127, 0.6034324739070036, 0.6098755987737574, 0.6120048940883943, 0.6164523542438214]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.55 : [0.7576647695979438, 0.7708669029970996, 0.7687175685693106, 0.7813460356484327, 0.777538107563992]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.55 : [0.25260129758844413, 0.2936410508224896, 0.3157157644766486, 0.31112334801762115, 0.3283337381588535]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.55 : [0.5859420422901558, 0.6043330579271091, 0.6083723492150923, 0.6119220294378653, 0.6141864806144619]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.03
Logistic F1-score 40.87303093566142
Logistic ROCAUC score: 59.537169617915076
Logistic Recall score: 27.99646404243149
Logistic Precision Score: 75.68175428732079
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[17660  1730]
 [13847  5384]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.91      0.69     19390
           1       0.76      0.28      0.41     19231

    accuracy                           0.60     38621
   macro avg       0.66      0.60      0.55     38621
weighted avg       0.66      0.60      0.55     38621


Logistic Accuracy Score 59.667020532870715
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.14461421966552734 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.03
DCT F1-score 31.065532766383193
DCT ROCAUC score: 57.028896849730835
DCT Recall score: 19.374967500389996
DCT Precision Score: 78.32667647677107
DCT Confusion Matrix [[18359  1031]
 [15505  3726]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.54      0.95      0.69     19390
           1       0.78      0.19      0.31     19231

    accuracy                           0.57     38621
   macro avg       0.66      0.57      0.50     38621
weighted avg       0.66      0.57      0.50     38621


DCT Accuracy Score 57.18391548639341
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  0.2892262935638428 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.03
Naive F1-score 64.83271917983144
Naive ROCAUC score: 50.257660126232174
Naive Recall score: 92.40289116530602
Naive Precision Score: 49.93396465001265
Naive Confusion Matrix [[ 1573 17817]
 [ 1461 17770]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.52      0.08      0.14     19390
           1       0.50      0.92      0.65     19231

    accuracy                           0.50     38621
   macro avg       0.51      0.50      0.39     38621
weighted avg       0.51      0.50      0.39     38621


Naive Accuracy Score 50.084151109500006
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.044881343841552734 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.03
XGB F1-Score 29.959100204498974
XGB ROCAUC Score: 68.59763014556782
XGB Recall score: 82.90497524168828
XGB Precision Score: 18.282980604232748
XGB Confusion Matrix [[18665 15715]
 [  725  3516]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.96      0.54      0.69     34380
           1       0.18      0.83      0.30      4241

    accuracy                           0.57     38621
   macro avg       0.57      0.69      0.50     38621
weighted avg       0.88      0.57      0.65     38621


XGB Accuracy Score 50.084151109500006
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.5684776306152344 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.03
RFC F1 score 37.00949367088607
RFC ROCAUC Score: 58.627326559755346
RFC Recall score: 77.33509671020003
RFC Precision Score: 24.325308096302845
RFC Confusion Matrix [[18019  1371]
 [14553  4678]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.55      0.93      0.69     19390
           1       0.77      0.24      0.37     19231

    accuracy                           0.59     38621
   macro avg       0.66      0.59      0.53     38621
weighted avg       0.66      0.59      0.53     38621


RFC Accuracy Score 58.768545609901345
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  106.0033106803894 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.65 : [array([0.4888999 , 0.4888999 , 0.52002722, ..., 0.4888999 , 0.4888999 ,
       0.4888999 ])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.65 : [0.4087303093566142]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5953716961791508]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.65 : [0.2799646404243149]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.65 : [0.7568175428732078]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5966702053287072]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.65 : [array([0.41485507, 0.41485507, 0.        , ..., 0.41485507, 0.41485507,
       0.41485507])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.65 : [0.3106553276638319]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5702889684973084]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.65 : [0.19374967500389995]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.65 : [0.7832667647677107]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5718391548639341]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.65 : [array([0.51178451, 0.51178451, 0.63051457, ..., 0.51178451, 0.51178451,
       0.51178451])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.65 : [0.6483271917983144]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5025766012623217]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.65 : [0.9240289116530601]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.65 : [0.49933964650012647]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5008415110950001]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.65 : [array([0.48220223, 0.48220223, 0.81854653, ..., 0.48220223, 0.48220223,
       0.48220223], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.65 : [0.29959100204498973]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.65 : [0.6859763014556782]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.65 : [0.8290497524168828]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.65 : [0.1828298060423275]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5743248491753191]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.65 : [array([0.41580126, 0.41580126, 0.56234141, ..., 0.41580126, 0.41580126,
       0.41580126])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.65 : [0.37009493670886073]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5862732655975534]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.65 : [0.7733509671020004]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.65 : [0.24325308096302845]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5876854560990135]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.065
Logistic F1-score 42.58454284240772
Logistic ROCAUC score: 59.776442316072846
Logistic Recall score: 29.79995875438235
Logistic Precision Score: 74.58064516129032
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[17255  1970]
 [13616  5780]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.90      0.69     19225
           1       0.75      0.30      0.43     19396

    accuracy                           0.60     38621
   macro avg       0.65      0.60      0.56     38621
weighted avg       0.65      0.60      0.56     38621


Logistic Accuracy Score 59.643717148701484
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.25136232376098633 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.065
DCT F1-score 36.625112352964166
DCT ROCAUC score: 58.160434457414965
DCT Recall score: 24.15962054031759
DCT Precision Score: 75.66607460035524
DCT Confusion Matrix [[17718  1507]
 [14710  4686]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.55      0.92      0.69     19225
           1       0.76      0.24      0.37     19396

    accuracy                           0.58     38621
   macro avg       0.65      0.58      0.53     38621
weighted avg       0.65      0.58      0.53     38621


DCT Accuracy Score 58.00989099194739
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  0.45977020263671875 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.065
Naive F1-score 46.9268635724332
Naive ROCAUC score: 61.03555047747569
Naive Recall score: 34.40400082491235
Naive Precision Score: 73.78372401592216
Naive Confusion Matrix [[16854  2371]
 [12723  6673]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.88      0.69     19225
           1       0.74      0.34      0.47     19396

    accuracy                           0.61     38621
   macro avg       0.65      0.61      0.58     38621
weighted avg       0.65      0.61      0.58     38621


Naive Accuracy Score 60.91763548328629
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.04787182807922363 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.065
XGB F1-Score 34.85417499001199
XGB ROCAUC Score: 65.92363022409867
XGB Recall score: 77.42279020234292
XGB Precision Score: 22.489173025366053
XGB Confusion Matrix [[17953 15034]
 [ 1272  4362]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.93      0.54      0.69     32987
           1       0.22      0.77      0.35      5634

    accuracy                           0.58     38621
   macro avg       0.58      0.66      0.52     38621
weighted avg       0.83      0.58      0.64     38621


XGB Accuracy Score 60.91763548328629
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.5924155712127686 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.065
RFC F1 score 41.17295032914423
RFC ROCAUC Score: 59.413459962921856
RFC Recall score: 74.98637602179836
RFC Precision Score: 28.37698494534956
RFC Confusion Matrix [[17389  1836]
 [13892  5504]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.90      0.69     19225
           1       0.75      0.28      0.41     19396

    accuracy                           0.59     38621
   macro avg       0.65      0.59      0.55     38621
weighted avg       0.65      0.59      0.55     38621


RFC Accuracy Score 59.27604153180912
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  217.38415479660034 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.65 : [array([0.4888999 , 0.4888999 , 0.52002722, ..., 0.4888999 , 0.4888999 ,
       0.4888999 ]), array([0.4581691 , 0.4581691 , 0.4581691 , ..., 0.4581691 , 0.80547118,
       0.32565409])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.65 : [0.4087303093566142, 0.42584542842407724]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5953716961791508, 0.5977644231607284]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.65 : [0.2799646404243149, 0.2979995875438235]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.65 : [0.7568175428732078, 0.7458064516129033]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5966702053287072, 0.5964371714870148]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.65 : [array([0.41485507, 0.41485507, 0.        , ..., 0.41485507, 0.41485507,
       0.41485507]), array([0.38783895, 0.38783895, 0.38783895, ..., 0.38783895, 1.        ,
       0.        ])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.65 : [0.3106553276638319, 0.3662511235296417]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5702889684973084, 0.5816043445741497]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.65 : [0.19374967500389995, 0.24159620540317592]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.65 : [0.7832667647677107, 0.7566607460035524]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5718391548639341, 0.5800989099194739]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.65 : [array([0.51178451, 0.51178451, 0.63051457, ..., 0.51178451, 0.51178451,
       0.51178451]), array([0.49818747, 0.47734753, 0.49818747, ..., 0.49818747, 0.90736581,
       0.28044327])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.65 : [0.6483271917983144, 0.469268635724332]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5025766012623217, 0.6103555047747569]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.65 : [0.9240289116530601, 0.3440400082491235]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.65 : [0.49933964650012647, 0.7378372401592216]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5008415110950001, 0.6091763548328629]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.65 : [array([0.48220223, 0.48220223, 0.81854653, ..., 0.48220223, 0.48220223,
       0.48220223], dtype=float32), array([0.44899166, 0.44899166, 0.44899166, ..., 0.44899166, 0.9981431 ,
       0.44899166], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.65 : [0.29959100204498973, 0.3485417499001199]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.65 : [0.6859763014556782, 0.6592363022409867]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.65 : [0.8290497524168828, 0.7742279020234292]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.65 : [0.1828298060423275, 0.22489173025366055]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5743248491753191, 0.5777944641516274]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.65 : [array([0.41580126, 0.41580126, 0.56234141, ..., 0.41580126, 0.41580126,
       0.41580126]), array([0.38746981, 0.38746981, 0.38746981, ..., 0.38746981, 0.92778096,
       0.19741226])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.65 : [0.37009493670886073, 0.4117295032914423]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5862732655975534, 0.5941345996292186]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.65 : [0.7733509671020004, 0.7498637602179836]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.65 : [0.24325308096302845, 0.2837698494534956]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5876854560990135, 0.5927604153180912]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.099
Logistic F1-score 42.7859215715455
Logistic ROCAUC score: 60.08605763066368
Logistic Recall score: 29.87168164579978
Logistic Precision Score: 75.37029754882684
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[17493  1879]
 [13499  5750]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.90      0.69     19372
           1       0.75      0.30      0.43     19249

    accuracy                           0.60     38621
   macro avg       0.66      0.60      0.56     38621
weighted avg       0.66      0.60      0.56     38621


Logistic Accuracy Score 60.18228424950157
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.3640291690826416 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.099
DCT F1-score 38.0859375
DCT ROCAUC score: 58.85337334524442
DCT Recall score: 25.325990960569378
DCT Precision Score: 76.75956542276808
DCT Confusion Matrix [[17896  1476]
 [14374  4875]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.55      0.92      0.69     19372
           1       0.77      0.25      0.38     19249

    accuracy                           0.59     38621
   macro avg       0.66      0.59      0.54     38621
weighted avg       0.66      0.59      0.54     38621


DCT Accuracy Score 58.96015121307061
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  0.6373286247253418 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.099
Naive F1-score 46.44624542781323
Naive ROCAUC score: 61.24401524509421
Naive Recall score: 33.643306145773806
Naive Precision Score: 74.97973833507004
Naive Confusion Matrix [[17211  2161]
 [12773  6476]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.89      0.70     19372
           1       0.75      0.34      0.46     19249

    accuracy                           0.61     38621
   macro avg       0.66      0.61      0.58     38621
weighted avg       0.66      0.61      0.58     38621


Naive Accuracy Score 61.331917868517124
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.0468754768371582 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.099
XGB F1-Score 35.07849166531801
XGB ROCAUC Score: 67.15496574791696
XGB Recall score: 79.2939454911286
XGB Precision Score: 22.52065042339862
XGB Confusion Matrix [[18240 14914]
 [ 1132  4335]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.94      0.55      0.69     33154
           1       0.23      0.79      0.35      5467

    accuracy                           0.58     38621
   macro avg       0.58      0.67      0.52     38621
weighted avg       0.84      0.58      0.65     38621


XGB Accuracy Score 61.331917868517124
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.6322898864746094 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.099
RFC F1 score 42.06925072371141
RFC ROCAUC Score: 60.00348886888928
RFC Recall score: 76.12244897959184
RFC Precision Score: 29.066445010130398
RFC Confusion Matrix [[17617  1755]
 [13654  5595]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.91      0.70     19372
           1       0.76      0.29      0.42     19249

    accuracy                           0.60     38621
   macro avg       0.66      0.60      0.56     38621
weighted avg       0.66      0.60      0.56     38621


RFC Accuracy Score 60.1020170373631
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  352.32001996040344 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.65 : [array([0.4888999 , 0.4888999 , 0.52002722, ..., 0.4888999 , 0.4888999 ,
       0.4888999 ]), array([0.4581691 , 0.4581691 , 0.4581691 , ..., 0.4581691 , 0.80547118,
       0.32565409]), array([0.34763319, 0.450025  , 0.55367037, ..., 0.41657913, 0.50552792,
       0.450025  ])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.65 : [0.4087303093566142, 0.42584542842407724, 0.427859215715455]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5953716961791508, 0.5977644231607284, 0.6008605763066368]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.65 : [0.2799646404243149, 0.2979995875438235, 0.2987168164579978]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.65 : [0.7568175428732078, 0.7458064516129033, 0.7537029754882685]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5966702053287072, 0.5964371714870148, 0.6018228424950157]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.65 : [array([0.41485507, 0.41485507, 0.        , ..., 0.41485507, 0.41485507,
       0.41485507]), array([0.38783895, 0.38783895, 0.38783895, ..., 0.38783895, 1.        ,
       0.        ]), array([0.16666667, 0.38644885, 1.        , ..., 0.4       , 0.5       ,
       0.38644885])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.65 : [0.3106553276638319, 0.3662511235296417, 0.380859375]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5702889684973084, 0.5816043445741497, 0.5885337334524442]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.65 : [0.19374967500389995, 0.24159620540317592, 0.2532599096056938]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.65 : [0.7832667647677107, 0.7566607460035524, 0.7675956542276807]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5718391548639341, 0.5800989099194739, 0.5896015121307061]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.65 : [array([0.51178451, 0.51178451, 0.63051457, ..., 0.51178451, 0.51178451,
       0.51178451]), array([0.49818747, 0.47734753, 0.49818747, ..., 0.49818747, 0.90736581,
       0.28044327]), array([0.32193488, 0.49149949, 0.61220157, ..., 0.39910683, 0.56460083,
       0.49149949])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.65 : [0.6483271917983144, 0.469268635724332, 0.4644624542781323]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5025766012623217, 0.6103555047747569, 0.6124401524509421]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.65 : [0.9240289116530601, 0.3440400082491235, 0.33643306145773805]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.65 : [0.49933964650012647, 0.7378372401592216, 0.7497973833507005]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5008415110950001, 0.6091763548328629, 0.6133191786851713]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.65 : [array([0.48220223, 0.48220223, 0.81854653, ..., 0.48220223, 0.48220223,
       0.48220223], dtype=float32), array([0.44899166, 0.44899166, 0.44899166, ..., 0.44899166, 0.9981431 ,
       0.44899166], dtype=float32), array([0.32243782, 0.4448548 , 0.4448548 , ..., 0.4448548 , 0.59630746,
       0.4448548 ], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.65 : [0.29959100204498973, 0.3485417499001199, 0.3507849166531801]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.65 : [0.6859763014556782, 0.6592363022409867, 0.6715496574791696]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.65 : [0.8290497524168828, 0.7742279020234292, 0.7929394549112859]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.65 : [0.1828298060423275, 0.22489173025366055, 0.2252065042339862]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5743248491753191, 0.5777944641516274, 0.5845265529116284]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.65 : [array([0.41580126, 0.41580126, 0.56234141, ..., 0.41580126, 0.41580126,
       0.41580126]), array([0.38746981, 0.38746981, 0.38746981, ..., 0.38746981, 0.92778096,
       0.19741226]), array([0.17166966, 0.38619586, 0.62366752, ..., 0.39820143, 0.52725319,
       0.38619586])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.65 : [0.37009493670886073, 0.4117295032914423, 0.42069250723711415]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5862732655975534, 0.5941345996292186, 0.6000348886888928]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.65 : [0.7733509671020004, 0.7498637602179836, 0.7612244897959184]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.65 : [0.24325308096302845, 0.2837698494534956, 0.290664450101304]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5876854560990135, 0.5927604153180912, 0.601020170373631]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.132
Logistic F1-score 45.133034052337685
Logistic ROCAUC score: 60.93484470126137
Logistic Recall score: 32.1763114071607
Logistic Precision Score: 75.55908590981304
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[17405  2000]
 [13033  6183]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.90      0.70     19405
           1       0.76      0.32      0.45     19216

    accuracy                           0.61     38621
   macro avg       0.66      0.61      0.57     38621
weighted avg       0.66      0.61      0.58     38621


Logistic Accuracy Score 61.075580642655545
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.1735365390777588 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.132
DCT F1-score 39.47755987907914
DCT ROCAUC score: 59.40503085550326
DCT Recall score: 26.503955037468774
DCT Precision Score: 77.33070148800486
DCT Confusion Matrix [[17912  1493]
 [14123  5093]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.92      0.70     19405
           1       0.77      0.27      0.39     19216

    accuracy                           0.60     38621
   macro avg       0.67      0.59      0.55     38621
weighted avg       0.67      0.60      0.55     38621


DCT Accuracy Score 59.5660392014707
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  0.8307745456695557 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.132
Naive F1-score 62.12095512711784
Naive ROCAUC score: 48.14248843240441
Naive Recall score: 85.76706910907576
Naive Precision Score: 48.695523711035605
Naive Confusion Matrix [[ 2041 17364]
 [ 2735 16481]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.43      0.11      0.17     19405
           1       0.49      0.86      0.62     19216

    accuracy                           0.48     38621
   macro avg       0.46      0.48      0.40     38621
weighted avg       0.46      0.48      0.39     38621


Naive Accuracy Score 47.9583646202843
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.04587674140930176 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.132
XGB F1-Score 37.18025699531644
XGB ROCAUC Score: 68.10198292805357
XGB Recall score: 80.55507372072853
XGB Precision Score: 24.16736053288926
XGB Confusion Matrix [[18284 14572]
 [ 1121  4644]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.94      0.56      0.70     32856
           1       0.24      0.81      0.37      5765

    accuracy                           0.59     38621
   macro avg       0.59      0.68      0.54     38621
weighted avg       0.84      0.59      0.65     38621


XGB Accuracy Score 47.9583646202843
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.6562426090240479 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.132
RFC F1 score 43.48118782257461
RFC ROCAUC Score: 60.72191206825197
RFC Recall score: 77.27997872906141
RFC Precision Score: 30.250832639467113
RFC Confusion Matrix [[17696  1709]
 [13403  5813]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.91      0.70     19405
           1       0.77      0.30      0.43     19216

    accuracy                           0.61     38621
   macro avg       0.67      0.61      0.57     38621
weighted avg       0.67      0.61      0.57     38621


RFC Accuracy Score 60.871028714947826
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  491.72286009788513 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.65 : [array([0.4888999 , 0.4888999 , 0.52002722, ..., 0.4888999 , 0.4888999 ,
       0.4888999 ]), array([0.4581691 , 0.4581691 , 0.4581691 , ..., 0.4581691 , 0.80547118,
       0.32565409]), array([0.34763319, 0.450025  , 0.55367037, ..., 0.41657913, 0.50552792,
       0.450025  ]), array([0.45919491, 0.45919491, 0.45919491, ..., 0.45919491, 0.68468108,
       0.53171655])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.65 : [0.4087303093566142, 0.42584542842407724, 0.427859215715455, 0.45133034052337684]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5953716961791508, 0.5977644231607284, 0.6008605763066368, 0.6093484470126137]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.65 : [0.2799646404243149, 0.2979995875438235, 0.2987168164579978, 0.321763114071607]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.65 : [0.7568175428732078, 0.7458064516129033, 0.7537029754882685, 0.7555908590981303]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5966702053287072, 0.5964371714870148, 0.6018228424950157, 0.6107558064265555]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.65 : [array([0.41485507, 0.41485507, 0.        , ..., 0.41485507, 0.41485507,
       0.41485507]), array([0.38783895, 0.38783895, 0.38783895, ..., 0.38783895, 1.        ,
       0.        ]), array([0.16666667, 0.38644885, 1.        , ..., 0.4       , 0.5       ,
       0.38644885]), array([0.39967605, 0.39967605, 0.39967605, ..., 0.39967605, 1.        ,
       0.39967605])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.65 : [0.3106553276638319, 0.3662511235296417, 0.380859375, 0.3947755987907914]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5702889684973084, 0.5816043445741497, 0.5885337334524442, 0.5940503085550326]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.65 : [0.19374967500389995, 0.24159620540317592, 0.2532599096056938, 0.26503955037468774]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.65 : [0.7832667647677107, 0.7566607460035524, 0.7675956542276807, 0.7733070148800486]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5718391548639341, 0.5800989099194739, 0.5896015121307061, 0.595660392014707]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.65 : [array([0.51178451, 0.51178451, 0.63051457, ..., 0.51178451, 0.51178451,
       0.51178451]), array([0.49818747, 0.47734753, 0.49818747, ..., 0.49818747, 0.90736581,
       0.28044327]), array([0.32193488, 0.49149949, 0.61220157, ..., 0.39910683, 0.56460083,
       0.49149949]), array([0.50650344, 0.50650344, 0.50650344, ..., 0.50650344, 0.81434128,
       0.6093217 ])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.65 : [0.6483271917983144, 0.469268635724332, 0.4644624542781323, 0.6212095512711784]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5025766012623217, 0.6103555047747569, 0.6124401524509421, 0.4814248843240441]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.65 : [0.9240289116530601, 0.3440400082491235, 0.33643306145773805, 0.8576706910907577]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.65 : [0.49933964650012647, 0.7378372401592216, 0.7497973833507005, 0.48695523711035604]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5008415110950001, 0.6091763548328629, 0.6133191786851713, 0.479583646202843]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.65 : [array([0.48220223, 0.48220223, 0.81854653, ..., 0.48220223, 0.48220223,
       0.48220223], dtype=float32), array([0.44899166, 0.44899166, 0.44899166, ..., 0.44899166, 0.9981431 ,
       0.44899166], dtype=float32), array([0.32243782, 0.4448548 , 0.4448548 , ..., 0.4448548 , 0.59630746,
       0.4448548 ], dtype=float32), array([0.4566416, 0.4566416, 0.4566416, ..., 0.4566416, 0.4566416,
       0.4566416], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.65 : [0.29959100204498973, 0.3485417499001199, 0.3507849166531801, 0.3718025699531644]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.65 : [0.6859763014556782, 0.6592363022409867, 0.6715496574791696, 0.6810198292805357]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.65 : [0.8290497524168828, 0.7742279020234292, 0.7929394549112859, 0.8055507372072853]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.65 : [0.1828298060423275, 0.22489173025366055, 0.2252065042339862, 0.2416736053288926]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5743248491753191, 0.5777944641516274, 0.5845265529116284, 0.5936666580357837]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.65 : [array([0.41580126, 0.41580126, 0.56234141, ..., 0.41580126, 0.41580126,
       0.41580126]), array([0.38746981, 0.38746981, 0.38746981, ..., 0.38746981, 0.92778096,
       0.19741226]), array([0.17166966, 0.38619586, 0.62366752, ..., 0.39820143, 0.52725319,
       0.38619586]), array([0.39954848, 0.39954848, 0.39954848, ..., 0.39954848, 0.56420353,
       0.58806867])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.65 : [0.37009493670886073, 0.4117295032914423, 0.42069250723711415, 0.43481187822574613]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5862732655975534, 0.5941345996292186, 0.6000348886888928, 0.6072191206825197]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.65 : [0.7733509671020004, 0.7498637602179836, 0.7612244897959184, 0.7727997872906142]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.65 : [0.24325308096302845, 0.2837698494534956, 0.290664450101304, 0.3025083263946711]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5876854560990135, 0.5927604153180912, 0.601020170373631, 0.6087102871494783]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.15
Logistic F1-score 44.822663884923685
Logistic ROCAUC score: 60.96153042360689
Logistic Recall score: 31.71388615528047
Logistic Precision Score: 76.40379336161716
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[17423  1891]
 [13184  6123]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.90      0.70     19314
           1       0.76      0.32      0.45     19307

    accuracy                           0.61     38621
   macro avg       0.67      0.61      0.57     38621
weighted avg       0.67      0.61      0.57     38621


Logistic Accuracy Score 60.96683151653246
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.20938444137573242 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.15
DCT F1-score 40.40652910378812
DCT ROCAUC score: 59.912246892357736
DCT Recall score: 27.181851142072823
DCT Precision Score: 78.69245763982606
DCT Confusion Matrix [[17893  1421]
 [14059  5248]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.93      0.70     19314
           1       0.79      0.27      0.40     19307

    accuracy                           0.60     38621
   macro avg       0.67      0.60      0.55     38621
weighted avg       0.67      0.60      0.55     38621


DCT Accuracy Score 59.91817922891691
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  0.9315071105957031 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.15
Naive F1-score 48.08704560709365
Naive ROCAUC score: 61.94591385115458
Naive Recall score: 35.251463199875694
Naive Precision Score: 75.62222222222222
Naive Confusion Matrix [[17120  2194]
 [12501  6806]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.58      0.89      0.70     19314
           1       0.76      0.35      0.48     19307

    accuracy                           0.62     38621
   macro avg       0.67      0.62      0.59     38621
weighted avg       0.67      0.62      0.59     38621


Naive Accuracy Score 61.950752181455684
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.04887032508850098 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.15
XGB F1-Score 36.74338273687592
XGB ROCAUC Score: 68.61056635201854
XGB Recall score: 81.824686940966
XGB Precision Score: 23.690889314756305
XGB Confusion Matrix [[18298 14733]
 [ 1016  4574]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.55      0.70     33031
           1       0.24      0.82      0.37      5590

    accuracy                           0.59     38621
   macro avg       0.59      0.69      0.53     38621
weighted avg       0.84      0.59      0.65     38621


XGB Accuracy Score 61.950752181455684
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.67319655418396 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.65 0.15
RFC F1 score 43.90243902439025
RFC ROCAUC Score: 61.046738233009776
RFC Recall score: 78.40682030105235
RFC Precision Score: 30.486352100274512
RFC Confusion Matrix [[17693  1621]
 [13421  5886]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.92      0.70     19314
           1       0.78      0.30      0.44     19307

    accuracy                           0.61     38621
   macro avg       0.68      0.61      0.57     38621
weighted avg       0.68      0.61      0.57     38621


RFC Accuracy Score 61.05227725848632
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  570.7194752693176 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.65 : [array([0.4888999 , 0.4888999 , 0.52002722, ..., 0.4888999 , 0.4888999 ,
       0.4888999 ]), array([0.4581691 , 0.4581691 , 0.4581691 , ..., 0.4581691 , 0.80547118,
       0.32565409]), array([0.34763319, 0.450025  , 0.55367037, ..., 0.41657913, 0.50552792,
       0.450025  ]), array([0.45919491, 0.45919491, 0.45919491, ..., 0.45919491, 0.68468108,
       0.53171655]), array([0.44867305, 0.50402242, 0.8534243 , ..., 0.44867305, 0.44867305,
       0.44867305])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.65 : [0.4087303093566142, 0.42584542842407724, 0.427859215715455, 0.45133034052337684, 0.44822663884923686]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5953716961791508, 0.5977644231607284, 0.6008605763066368, 0.6093484470126137, 0.6096153042360689]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.65 : [0.2799646404243149, 0.2979995875438235, 0.2987168164579978, 0.321763114071607, 0.3171388615528047]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.65 : [0.7568175428732078, 0.7458064516129033, 0.7537029754882685, 0.7555908590981303, 0.7640379336161717]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5966702053287072, 0.5964371714870148, 0.6018228424950157, 0.6107558064265555, 0.6096683151653246]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.65 : [array([0.41485507, 0.41485507, 0.        , ..., 0.41485507, 0.41485507,
       0.41485507]), array([0.38783895, 0.38783895, 0.38783895, ..., 0.38783895, 1.        ,
       0.        ]), array([0.16666667, 0.38644885, 1.        , ..., 0.4       , 0.5       ,
       0.38644885]), array([0.39967605, 0.39967605, 0.39967605, ..., 0.39967605, 1.        ,
       0.39967605]), array([0.39161336, 0.39161336, 1.        , ..., 0.39161336, 0.39161336,
       0.39161336])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.65 : [0.3106553276638319, 0.3662511235296417, 0.380859375, 0.3947755987907914, 0.4040652910378812]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5702889684973084, 0.5816043445741497, 0.5885337334524442, 0.5940503085550326, 0.5991224689235773]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.65 : [0.19374967500389995, 0.24159620540317592, 0.2532599096056938, 0.26503955037468774, 0.2718185114207282]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.65 : [0.7832667647677107, 0.7566607460035524, 0.7675956542276807, 0.7733070148800486, 0.7869245763982606]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5718391548639341, 0.5800989099194739, 0.5896015121307061, 0.595660392014707, 0.5991817922891691]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.65 : [array([0.51178451, 0.51178451, 0.63051457, ..., 0.51178451, 0.51178451,
       0.51178451]), array([0.49818747, 0.47734753, 0.49818747, ..., 0.49818747, 0.90736581,
       0.28044327]), array([0.32193488, 0.49149949, 0.61220157, ..., 0.39910683, 0.56460083,
       0.49149949]), array([0.50650344, 0.50650344, 0.50650344, ..., 0.50650344, 0.81434128,
       0.6093217 ]), array([0.47139065, 0.63811951, 0.97683846, ..., 0.49786804, 0.49786804,
       0.49786804])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.65 : [0.6483271917983144, 0.469268635724332, 0.4644624542781323, 0.6212095512711784, 0.4808704560709365]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5025766012623217, 0.6103555047747569, 0.6124401524509421, 0.4814248843240441, 0.6194591385115458]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.65 : [0.9240289116530601, 0.3440400082491235, 0.33643306145773805, 0.8576706910907577, 0.35251463199875693]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.65 : [0.49933964650012647, 0.7378372401592216, 0.7497973833507005, 0.48695523711035604, 0.7562222222222222]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5008415110950001, 0.6091763548328629, 0.6133191786851713, 0.479583646202843, 0.6195075218145568]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.65 : [array([0.48220223, 0.48220223, 0.81854653, ..., 0.48220223, 0.48220223,
       0.48220223], dtype=float32), array([0.44899166, 0.44899166, 0.44899166, ..., 0.44899166, 0.9981431 ,
       0.44899166], dtype=float32), array([0.32243782, 0.4448548 , 0.4448548 , ..., 0.4448548 , 0.59630746,
       0.4448548 ], dtype=float32), array([0.4566416, 0.4566416, 0.4566416, ..., 0.4566416, 0.4566416,
       0.4566416], dtype=float32), array([0.44632706, 0.44632706, 0.99560463, ..., 0.44632706, 0.44632706,
       0.44632706], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.65 : [0.29959100204498973, 0.3485417499001199, 0.3507849166531801, 0.3718025699531644, 0.36743382736875924]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.65 : [0.6859763014556782, 0.6592363022409867, 0.6715496574791696, 0.6810198292805357, 0.6861056635201853]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.65 : [0.8290497524168828, 0.7742279020234292, 0.7929394549112859, 0.8055507372072853, 0.8182468694096601]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.65 : [0.1828298060423275, 0.22489173025366055, 0.2252065042339862, 0.2416736053288926, 0.23690889314756305]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5743248491753191, 0.5777944641516274, 0.5845265529116284, 0.5936666580357837, 0.5922166696874758]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.65 : [array([0.41580126, 0.41580126, 0.56234141, ..., 0.41580126, 0.41580126,
       0.41580126]), array([0.38746981, 0.38746981, 0.38746981, ..., 0.38746981, 0.92778096,
       0.19741226]), array([0.17166966, 0.38619586, 0.62366752, ..., 0.39820143, 0.52725319,
       0.38619586]), array([0.39954848, 0.39954848, 0.39954848, ..., 0.39954848, 0.56420353,
       0.58806867]), array([0.39164843, 0.40135429, 0.89563882, ..., 0.39164843, 0.39164843,
       0.39164843])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.65 : [0.37009493670886073, 0.4117295032914423, 0.42069250723711415, 0.43481187822574613, 0.4390243902439025]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5862732655975534, 0.5941345996292186, 0.6000348886888928, 0.6072191206825197, 0.6104673823300978]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.65 : [0.7733509671020004, 0.7498637602179836, 0.7612244897959184, 0.7727997872906142, 0.7840682030105235]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.65 : [0.24325308096302845, 0.2837698494534956, 0.290664450101304, 0.3025083263946711, 0.3048635210027451]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.65 : [0.5876854560990135, 0.5927604153180912, 0.601020170373631, 0.6087102871494783, 0.6105227725848632]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.023
Logistic F1-score 40.16339869281046
Logistic ROCAUC score: 58.8105473689606
Logistic Recall score: 27.66896303300464
Logistic Precision Score: 73.23322607555714
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[20107  2246]
 [16064  6145]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.90      0.69     22353
           1       0.73      0.28      0.40     22209

    accuracy                           0.59     44562
   macro avg       0.64      0.59      0.54     44562
weighted avg       0.64      0.59      0.54     44562


Logistic Accuracy Score 58.91117992908757
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.15558314323425293 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.023
DCT F1-score 31.216591832371176
DCT ROCAUC score: 56.566007465624445
DCT Recall score: 19.72173443198703
DCT Precision Score: 74.83341875961045
DCT Confusion Matrix [[20880  1473]
 [17829  4380]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.54      0.93      0.68     22353
           1       0.75      0.20      0.31     22209

    accuracy                           0.57     44562
   macro avg       0.64      0.57      0.50     44562
weighted avg       0.64      0.57      0.50     44562


DCT Accuracy Score 56.685067995152814
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  0.22539806365966797 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.023
Naive F1-score 64.66556590547992
Naive ROCAUC score: 49.23854837904489
Naive Recall score: 93.46210995542347
Naive Precision Score: 49.43437566981829
Naive Confusion Matrix [[ 1121 21232]
 [ 1452 20757]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.44      0.05      0.09     22353
           1       0.49      0.93      0.65     22209

    accuracy                           0.49     44562
   macro avg       0.47      0.49      0.37     44562
weighted avg       0.46      0.49      0.37     44562


Naive Accuracy Score 49.09564202683901
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.053856611251831055 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.023
XGB F1-Score 30.36789783034613
XGB ROCAUC Score: 66.10571091722905
XGB Recall score: 78.1804595553895
XGB Precision Score: 18.843712008645145
XGB Confusion Matrix [[21185 18024]
 [ 1168  4185]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.54      0.69     39209
           1       0.19      0.78      0.30      5353

    accuracy                           0.57     44562
   macro avg       0.57      0.66      0.50     44562
weighted avg       0.86      0.57      0.64     44562


XGB Accuracy Score 49.09564202683901
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.5764226913452148 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.023
RFC F1 score 36.9678230437294
RFC ROCAUC Score: 58.26124499385147
RFC Recall score: 75.325394627527
RFC Precision Score: 24.494574271691658
RFC Confusion Matrix [[20571  1782]
 [16769  5440]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.55      0.92      0.69     22353
           1       0.75      0.24      0.37     22209

    accuracy                           0.58     44562
   macro avg       0.65      0.58      0.53     44562
weighted avg       0.65      0.58      0.53     44562


RFC Accuracy Score 58.3703603967506
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  83.46556997299194 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.75 : [array([0.47622303, 0.47622303, 0.47622303, ..., 0.47622303, 0.50780356,
       0.47622303])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.75 : [0.4016339869281046]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.75 : [0.588105473689606]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.75 : [0.2766896303300464]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.75 : [0.7323322607555715]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.75 : [0.5891117992908756]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.75 : [array([0.39491917, 0.39491917, 0.39491917, ..., 0.39491917, 0.39491917,
       0.39491917])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.75 : [0.31216591832371177]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.75 : [0.5656600746562445]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.75 : [0.1972173443198703]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.75 : [0.7483341875961046]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.75 : [0.5668506799515282]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.75 : [array([0.50805271, 0.50805271, 0.50805271, ..., 0.50805271, 0.57979483,
       0.50805271])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.75 : [0.6466556590547993]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.75 : [0.49238548379044894]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.75 : [0.9346210995542348]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.75 : [0.49434375669818287]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.75 : [0.4909564202683901]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.75 : [array([0.46839783, 0.46839783, 0.46839783, ..., 0.46839783, 0.46839783,
       0.46839783], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.75 : [0.3036789783034613]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.75 : [0.6610571091722904]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.75 : [0.781804595553895]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.75 : [0.18843712008645144]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.75 : [0.5693191508460123]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.75 : [array([0.39488015, 0.39488015, 0.39488015, ..., 0.39488015, 0.46625231,
       0.39488015])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.75 : [0.36967823043729403]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.75 : [0.5826124499385147]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.75 : [0.75325394627527]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.75 : [0.24494574271691658]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.75 : [0.583703603967506]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.056
Logistic F1-score 43.86361465728566
Logistic ROCAUC score: 60.42908716038596
Logistic Recall score: 30.920107719928186
Logistic Precision Score: 75.44628189683496
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[20040  2242]
 [15391  6889]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.90      0.69     22282
           1       0.75      0.31      0.44     22280

    accuracy                           0.60     44562
   macro avg       0.66      0.60      0.57     44562
weighted avg       0.66      0.60      0.57     44562


Logistic Accuracy Score 60.43041156142004
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.18248271942138672 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.056
DCT F1-score 35.201498231254774
DCT ROCAUC score: 58.07031587274397
DCT Recall score: 22.778276481149014
DCT Precision Score: 77.43362831858407
DCT Confusion Matrix [[20803  1479]
 [17205  5075]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.55      0.93      0.69     22282
           1       0.77      0.23      0.35     22280

    accuracy                           0.58     44562
   macro avg       0.66      0.58      0.52     44562
weighted avg       0.66      0.58      0.52     44562


DCT Accuracy Score 58.07189982496297
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  0.43782901763916016 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.056
Naive F1-score 64.29745471954041
Naive ROCAUC score: 49.7953694418388
Naive Recall score: 90.42190305206464
Naive Precision Score: 49.88485823944534
Naive Confusion Matrix [[ 2043 20239]
 [ 2134 20146]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.49      0.09      0.15     22282
           1       0.50      0.90      0.64     22280

    accuracy                           0.50     44562
   macro avg       0.49      0.50      0.40     44562
weighted avg       0.49      0.50      0.40     44562


Naive Accuracy Score 49.793546070643146
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.05085587501525879 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.056
XGB F1-Score 33.715685926346815
XGB ROCAUC Score: 67.71010248791168
XGB Recall score: 80.74502466405852
XGB Precision Score: 21.306104129263915
XGB Confusion Matrix [[21150 17533]
 [ 1132  4747]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.55      0.69     38683
           1       0.21      0.81      0.34      5879

    accuracy                           0.58     44562
   macro avg       0.58      0.68      0.52     44562
weighted avg       0.85      0.58      0.65     44562


XGB Accuracy Score 49.793546070643146
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.5814430713653564 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.056
RFC F1 score 40.8737896163125
RFC ROCAUC Score: 59.85000250582666
RFC Recall score: 77.50344654718636
RFC Precision Score: 27.755834829443447
RFC Confusion Matrix [[20487  1795]
 [16096  6184]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.92      0.70     22282
           1       0.78      0.28      0.41     22280

    accuracy                           0.60     44562
   macro avg       0.67      0.60      0.55     44562
weighted avg       0.67      0.60      0.55     44562


RFC Accuracy Score 59.85144293344105
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  193.91995692253113 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.75 : [array([0.47622303, 0.47622303, 0.47622303, ..., 0.47622303, 0.50780356,
       0.47622303]), array([0.37620424, 0.4798747 , 0.4798747 , ..., 0.4798747 , 0.4798747 ,
       0.4798747 ])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.75 : [0.4016339869281046, 0.4386361465728566]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.75 : [0.588105473689606, 0.6042908716038596]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.75 : [0.2766896303300464, 0.30920107719928186]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.75 : [0.7323322607555715, 0.7544628189683495]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.75 : [0.5891117992908756, 0.6043041156142004]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.75 : [array([0.39491917, 0.39491917, 0.39491917, ..., 0.39491917, 0.39491917,
       0.39491917]), array([0.        , 0.41012299, 0.41012299, ..., 0.41012299, 0.41012299,
       0.41012299])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.75 : [0.31216591832371177, 0.35201498231254774]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.75 : [0.5656600746562445, 0.5807031587274397]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.75 : [0.1972173443198703, 0.22778276481149012]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.75 : [0.7483341875961046, 0.7743362831858407]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.75 : [0.5668506799515282, 0.5807189982496297]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.75 : [array([0.50805271, 0.50805271, 0.50805271, ..., 0.50805271, 0.57979483,
       0.50805271]), array([0.37829362, 0.5145777 , 0.5145777 , ..., 0.5145777 , 0.5145777 ,
       0.5145777 ])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.75 : [0.6466556590547993, 0.6429745471954041]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.75 : [0.49238548379044894, 0.497953694418388]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.75 : [0.9346210995542348, 0.9042190305206463]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.75 : [0.49434375669818287, 0.4988485823944534]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.75 : [0.4909564202683901, 0.49793546070643147]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.75 : [array([0.46839783, 0.46839783, 0.46839783, ..., 0.46839783, 0.46839783,
       0.46839783], dtype=float32), array([0.47007084, 0.47007084, 0.47007084, ..., 0.47007084, 0.47007084,
       0.47007084], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.75 : [0.3036789783034613, 0.33715685926346817]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.75 : [0.6610571091722904, 0.6771010248791168]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.75 : [0.781804595553895, 0.8074502466405852]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.75 : [0.18843712008645144, 0.21306104129263914]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.75 : [0.5693191508460123, 0.5811453704950407]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.75 : [array([0.39488015, 0.39488015, 0.39488015, ..., 0.39488015, 0.46625231,
       0.39488015]), array([0.24935759, 0.41007568, 0.41007568, ..., 0.41007568, 0.41007568,
       0.41007568])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.75 : [0.36967823043729403, 0.408737896163125]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.75 : [0.5826124499385147, 0.5985000250582666]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.75 : [0.75325394627527, 0.7750344654718636]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.75 : [0.24494574271691658, 0.2775583482944345]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.75 : [0.583703603967506, 0.5985144293344105]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.076
Logistic F1-score 43.59590907633613
Logistic ROCAUC score: 60.474527825069046
Logistic Recall score: 30.561424012226368
Logistic Precision Score: 76.01744186046511
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[20170  2145]
 [15448  6799]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.90      0.70     22315
           1       0.76      0.31      0.44     22247

    accuracy                           0.61     44562
   macro avg       0.66      0.60      0.57     44562
weighted avg       0.66      0.61      0.57     44562


Logistic Accuracy Score 60.520174139401284
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.17453336715698242 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.076
DCT F1-score 36.68879182859304
DCT ROCAUC score: 58.6361278538982
DCT Recall score: 23.97626646289387
DCT Precision Score: 78.09663250366032
DCT Confusion Matrix [[20819  1496]
 [16913  5334]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.55      0.93      0.69     22315
           1       0.78      0.24      0.37     22247

    accuracy                           0.59     44562
   macro avg       0.67      0.59      0.53     44562
weighted avg       0.67      0.59      0.53     44562


DCT Accuracy Score 58.689017548584
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  0.5535173416137695 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.076
Naive F1-score 61.749667066734624
Naive ROCAUC score: 47.84763553504524
Naive Recall score: 84.41138130983953
Naive Precision Score: 48.6805267523849
Naive Confusion Matrix [[ 2518 19797]
 [ 3468 18779]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.42      0.11      0.18     22315
           1       0.49      0.84      0.62     22247

    accuracy                           0.48     44562
   macro avg       0.45      0.48      0.40     44562
weighted avg       0.45      0.48      0.40     44562


Naive Accuracy Score 47.7918405816615
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.05485343933105469 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.076
XGB F1-Score 35.28750570796305
XGB ROCAUC Score: 67.90265396802401
XGB Recall score: 80.72966891674702
XGB Precision Score: 22.578325167438308
XGB Confusion Matrix [[21116 17224]
 [ 1199  5023]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.55      0.70     38340
           1       0.23      0.81      0.35      6222

    accuracy                           0.59     44562
   macro avg       0.59      0.68      0.52     44562
weighted avg       0.85      0.59      0.65     44562


XGB Accuracy Score 47.7918405816615
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.6233320236206055 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.076
RFC F1 score 42.195810624466475
RFC ROCAUC Score: 60.44284485670983
RFC Recall score: 78.26086956521739
RFC Precision Score: 28.88479345529734
RFC Confusion Matrix [[20530  1785]
 [15821  6426]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.92      0.70     22315
           1       0.78      0.29      0.42     22247

    accuracy                           0.60     44562
   macro avg       0.67      0.60      0.56     44562
weighted avg       0.67      0.60      0.56     44562


RFC Accuracy Score 60.491001301557375
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  280.26584672927856 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.75 : [array([0.47622303, 0.47622303, 0.47622303, ..., 0.47622303, 0.50780356,
       0.47622303]), array([0.37620424, 0.4798747 , 0.4798747 , ..., 0.4798747 , 0.4798747 ,
       0.4798747 ]), array([0.46419619, 0.63753256, 0.46419619, ..., 0.59478692, 0.46419619,
       0.46419619])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.75 : [0.4016339869281046, 0.4386361465728566, 0.43595909076336126]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.75 : [0.588105473689606, 0.6042908716038596, 0.6047452782506905]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.75 : [0.2766896303300464, 0.30920107719928186, 0.3056142401222637]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.75 : [0.7323322607555715, 0.7544628189683495, 0.7601744186046512]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.75 : [0.5891117992908756, 0.6043041156142004, 0.6052017413940128]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.75 : [array([0.39491917, 0.39491917, 0.39491917, ..., 0.39491917, 0.39491917,
       0.39491917]), array([0.        , 0.41012299, 0.41012299, ..., 0.41012299, 0.41012299,
       0.41012299]), array([0.39130435, 1.        , 0.39130435, ..., 1.        , 0.39130435,
       0.39130435])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.75 : [0.31216591832371177, 0.35201498231254774, 0.3668879182859304]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.75 : [0.5656600746562445, 0.5807031587274397, 0.586361278538982]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.75 : [0.1972173443198703, 0.22778276481149012, 0.23976266462893872]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.75 : [0.7483341875961046, 0.7743362831858407, 0.7809663250366032]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.75 : [0.5668506799515282, 0.5807189982496297, 0.58689017548584]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.75 : [array([0.50805271, 0.50805271, 0.50805271, ..., 0.50805271, 0.57979483,
       0.50805271]), array([0.37829362, 0.5145777 , 0.5145777 , ..., 0.5145777 , 0.5145777 ,
       0.5145777 ]), array([0.50498339, 0.78280637, 0.50498339, ..., 0.71574881, 0.50498339,
       0.50498339])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.75 : [0.6466556590547993, 0.6429745471954041, 0.6174966706673463]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.75 : [0.49238548379044894, 0.497953694418388, 0.4784763553504524]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.75 : [0.9346210995542348, 0.9042190305206463, 0.8441138130983953]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.75 : [0.49434375669818287, 0.4988485823944534, 0.486805267523849]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.75 : [0.4909564202683901, 0.49793546070643147, 0.47791840581661504]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.75 : [array([0.46839783, 0.46839783, 0.46839783, ..., 0.46839783, 0.46839783,
       0.46839783], dtype=float32), array([0.47007084, 0.47007084, 0.47007084, ..., 0.47007084, 0.47007084,
       0.47007084], dtype=float32), array([0.45865524, 0.8216879 , 0.45865524, ..., 0.693115  , 0.45865524,
       0.45865524], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.75 : [0.3036789783034613, 0.33715685926346817, 0.3528750570796305]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.75 : [0.6610571091722904, 0.6771010248791168, 0.6790265396802401]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.75 : [0.781804595553895, 0.8074502466405852, 0.8072966891674702]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.75 : [0.18843712008645144, 0.21306104129263914, 0.22578325167438307]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.75 : [0.5693191508460123, 0.5811453704950407, 0.5865760064629056]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.75 : [array([0.39488015, 0.39488015, 0.39488015, ..., 0.39488015, 0.46625231,
       0.39488015]), array([0.24935759, 0.41007568, 0.41007568, ..., 0.41007568, 0.41007568,
       0.41007568]), array([0.39137421, 0.74845842, 0.39137421, ..., 0.76440019, 0.39137421,
       0.39137421])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.75 : [0.36967823043729403, 0.408737896163125, 0.42195810624466473]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.75 : [0.5826124499385147, 0.5985000250582666, 0.6044284485670983]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.75 : [0.75325394627527, 0.7750344654718636, 0.782608695652174]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.75 : [0.24494574271691658, 0.2775583482944345, 0.2888479345529734]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.75 : [0.583703603967506, 0.5985144293344105, 0.6049100130155738]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.104
Logistic F1-score 43.76301707840687
Logistic ROCAUC score: 60.56349604217327
Logistic Recall score: 30.701793822775702
Logistic Precision Score: 76.16551416462191
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[20182  2137]
 [15414  6829]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.90      0.70     22319
           1       0.76      0.31      0.44     22243

    accuracy                           0.61     44562
   macro avg       0.66      0.61      0.57     44562
weighted avg       0.66      0.61      0.57     44562


Logistic Accuracy Score 60.61442484628159
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.16156816482543945 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.104
DCT F1-score 38.37142178002649
DCT ROCAUC score: 59.214805658568636
DCT Recall score: 25.401249831407636
DCT Precision Score: 78.40688315292812
DCT Confusion Matrix [[20763  1556]
 [16593  5650]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.93      0.70     22319
           1       0.78      0.25      0.38     22243

    accuracy                           0.59     44562
   macro avg       0.67      0.59      0.54     44562
weighted avg       0.67      0.59      0.54     44562


DCT Accuracy Score 59.272474305462055
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  0.6652190685272217 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.104
Naive F1-score 61.641907222470635
Naive ROCAUC score: 48.08590605849752
Naive Recall score: 83.66677156858337
Naive Precision Score: 48.79647595573968
Naive Confusion Matrix [[ 2791 19528]
 [ 3633 18610]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.43      0.13      0.19     22319
           1       0.49      0.84      0.62     22243

    accuracy                           0.48     44562
   macro avg       0.46      0.48      0.41     44562
weighted avg       0.46      0.48      0.40     44562


Naive Accuracy Score 48.025223284412725
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.052860260009765625 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.104
XGB F1-Score 35.648911175789884
XGB ROCAUC Score: 68.09933765747802
XGB Recall score: 81.01689512272873
XGB Precision Score: 22.852133255406194
XGB Confusion Matrix [[21128 17160]
 [ 1191  5083]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.55      0.70     38288
           1       0.23      0.81      0.36      6274

    accuracy                           0.59     44562
   macro avg       0.59      0.68      0.53     44562
weighted avg       0.85      0.59      0.65     44562


XGB Accuracy Score 48.025223284412725
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.6472656726837158 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.104
RFC F1 score 42.324251487166
RFC ROCAUC Score: 60.56499128375678
RFC Recall score: 78.67790811339198
RFC Precision Score: 28.948433214944025
RFC Confusion Matrix [[20574  1745]
 [15804  6439]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.92      0.70     22319
           1       0.79      0.29      0.42     22243

    accuracy                           0.61     44562
   macro avg       0.68      0.61      0.56     44562
weighted avg       0.68      0.61      0.56     44562


RFC Accuracy Score 60.61891297518065
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  392.90738463401794 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.75 : [array([0.47622303, 0.47622303, 0.47622303, ..., 0.47622303, 0.50780356,
       0.47622303]), array([0.37620424, 0.4798747 , 0.4798747 , ..., 0.4798747 , 0.4798747 ,
       0.4798747 ]), array([0.46419619, 0.63753256, 0.46419619, ..., 0.59478692, 0.46419619,
       0.46419619]), array([0.26301193, 0.46322081, 0.46322081, ..., 0.34530783, 0.48730951,
       0.37863065])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.75 : [0.4016339869281046, 0.4386361465728566, 0.43595909076336126, 0.4376301707840687]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.75 : [0.588105473689606, 0.6042908716038596, 0.6047452782506905, 0.6056349604217327]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.75 : [0.2766896303300464, 0.30920107719928186, 0.3056142401222637, 0.307017938227757]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.75 : [0.7323322607555715, 0.7544628189683495, 0.7601744186046512, 0.7616551416462191]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.75 : [0.5891117992908756, 0.6043041156142004, 0.6052017413940128, 0.6061442484628159]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.75 : [array([0.39491917, 0.39491917, 0.39491917, ..., 0.39491917, 0.39491917,
       0.39491917]), array([0.        , 0.41012299, 0.41012299, ..., 0.41012299, 0.41012299,
       0.41012299]), array([0.39130435, 1.        , 0.39130435, ..., 1.        , 0.39130435,
       0.39130435]), array([0.        , 0.40724785, 0.40724785, ..., 0.        , 0.5       ,
       0.        ])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.75 : [0.31216591832371177, 0.35201498231254774, 0.3668879182859304, 0.3837142178002649]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.75 : [0.5656600746562445, 0.5807031587274397, 0.586361278538982, 0.5921480565856864]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.75 : [0.1972173443198703, 0.22778276481149012, 0.23976266462893872, 0.25401249831407635]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.75 : [0.7483341875961046, 0.7743362831858407, 0.7809663250366032, 0.7840688315292812]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.75 : [0.5668506799515282, 0.5807189982496297, 0.58689017548584, 0.5927247430546205]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.75 : [array([0.50805271, 0.50805271, 0.50805271, ..., 0.50805271, 0.57979483,
       0.50805271]), array([0.37829362, 0.5145777 , 0.5145777 , ..., 0.5145777 , 0.5145777 ,
       0.5145777 ]), array([0.50498339, 0.78280637, 0.50498339, ..., 0.71574881, 0.50498339,
       0.50498339]), array([0.14642889, 0.50186114, 0.50186114, ..., 0.50785153, 0.52646878,
       0.40793895])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.75 : [0.6466556590547993, 0.6429745471954041, 0.6174966706673463, 0.6164190722247064]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.75 : [0.49238548379044894, 0.497953694418388, 0.4784763553504524, 0.4808590605849752]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.75 : [0.9346210995542348, 0.9042190305206463, 0.8441138130983953, 0.8366677156858338]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.75 : [0.49434375669818287, 0.4988485823944534, 0.486805267523849, 0.4879647595573968]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.75 : [0.4909564202683901, 0.49793546070643147, 0.47791840581661504, 0.48025223284412727]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.75 : [array([0.46839783, 0.46839783, 0.46839783, ..., 0.46839783, 0.46839783,
       0.46839783], dtype=float32), array([0.47007084, 0.47007084, 0.47007084, ..., 0.47007084, 0.47007084,
       0.47007084], dtype=float32), array([0.45865524, 0.8216879 , 0.45865524, ..., 0.693115  , 0.45865524,
       0.45865524], dtype=float32), array([0.23363847, 0.4565823 , 0.4565823 , ..., 0.15650691, 0.4565823 ,
       0.1971698 ], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.75 : [0.3036789783034613, 0.33715685926346817, 0.3528750570796305, 0.3564891117578988]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.75 : [0.6610571091722904, 0.6771010248791168, 0.6790265396802401, 0.6809933765747802]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.75 : [0.781804595553895, 0.8074502466405852, 0.8072966891674702, 0.8101689512272873]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.75 : [0.18843712008645144, 0.21306104129263914, 0.22578325167438307, 0.22852133255406196]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.75 : [0.5693191508460123, 0.5811453704950407, 0.5865760064629056, 0.5881917328665679]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.75 : [array([0.39488015, 0.39488015, 0.39488015, ..., 0.39488015, 0.46625231,
       0.39488015]), array([0.24935759, 0.41007568, 0.41007568, ..., 0.41007568, 0.41007568,
       0.41007568]), array([0.39137421, 0.74845842, 0.39137421, ..., 0.76440019, 0.39137421,
       0.39137421]), array([0.04703455, 0.40698581, 0.40698581, ..., 0.00141196, 0.4918621 ,
       0.19113118])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.75 : [0.36967823043729403, 0.408737896163125, 0.42195810624466473, 0.42324251487166004]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.75 : [0.5826124499385147, 0.5985000250582666, 0.6044284485670983, 0.6056499128375679]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.75 : [0.75325394627527, 0.7750344654718636, 0.782608695652174, 0.7867790811339198]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.75 : [0.24494574271691658, 0.2775583482944345, 0.2888479345529734, 0.28948433214944025]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.75 : [0.583703603967506, 0.5985144293344105, 0.6049100130155738, 0.6061891297518065]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.113
Logistic F1-score 44.33556707548363
Logistic ROCAUC score: 60.44566837841418
Logistic Recall score: 31.514851930076844
Logistic Precision Score: 74.7415538740275
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[19939  2370]
 [15240  7013]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.89      0.69     22309
           1       0.75      0.32      0.44     22253

    accuracy                           0.60     44562
   macro avg       0.66      0.60      0.57     44562
weighted avg       0.66      0.60      0.57     44562


Logistic Accuracy Score 60.48202504375926
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.17349863052368164 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.113
DCT F1-score 38.84048257372654
DCT ROCAUC score: 59.0044000230061
DCT Recall score: 26.04143261582708
DCT Precision Score: 76.3806511137472
DCT Confusion Matrix [[20517  1792]
 [16458  5795]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.55      0.92      0.69     22309
           1       0.76      0.26      0.39     22253

    accuracy                           0.59     44562
   macro avg       0.66      0.59      0.54     44562
weighted avg       0.66      0.59      0.54     44562


DCT Accuracy Score 59.04582379605942
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  0.7789146900177002 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.113
Naive F1-score 62.207522145629014
Naive ROCAUC score: 48.25138668667147
Naive Recall score: 85.36377117691997
Naive Precision Score: 48.93353941267388
Naive Confusion Matrix [[ 2485 19824]
 [ 3257 18996]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.43      0.11      0.18     22309
           1       0.49      0.85      0.62     22253

    accuracy                           0.48     44562
   macro avg       0.46      0.48      0.40     44562
weighted avg       0.46      0.48      0.40     44562


Naive Accuracy Score 48.204748440375205
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.0548861026763916 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.113
XGB F1-Score 36.231478892927036
XGB ROCAUC Score: 68.39329421043887
XGB Recall score: 81.47100424328147
XGB Precision Score: 23.29573540646205
XGB Confusion Matrix [[21130 17069]
 [ 1179  5184]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.55      0.70     38199
           1       0.23      0.81      0.36      6363

    accuracy                           0.59     44562
   macro avg       0.59      0.68      0.53     44562
weighted avg       0.85      0.59      0.65     44562


XGB Accuracy Score 48.204748440375205
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.7031190395355225 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.75 0.113
RFC F1 score 43.154034229828845
RFC ROCAUC Score: 60.30946762204695
RFC Recall score: 75.94836371871814
RFC Precision Score: 30.13975643733429
RFC Confusion Matrix [[20185  2124]
 [15546  6707]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.90      0.70     22309
           1       0.76      0.30      0.43     22253

    accuracy                           0.60     44562
   macro avg       0.66      0.60      0.56     44562
weighted avg       0.66      0.60      0.56     44562


RFC Accuracy Score 60.347381176787394
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  430.56057024002075 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.75 : [array([0.47622303, 0.47622303, 0.47622303, ..., 0.47622303, 0.50780356,
       0.47622303]), array([0.37620424, 0.4798747 , 0.4798747 , ..., 0.4798747 , 0.4798747 ,
       0.4798747 ]), array([0.46419619, 0.63753256, 0.46419619, ..., 0.59478692, 0.46419619,
       0.46419619]), array([0.26301193, 0.46322081, 0.46322081, ..., 0.34530783, 0.48730951,
       0.37863065]), array([0.45698325, 0.45698325, 0.45698325, ..., 0.45698325, 0.67452601,
       0.58780834])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.75 : [0.4016339869281046, 0.4386361465728566, 0.43595909076336126, 0.4376301707840687, 0.4433556707548363]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.75 : [0.588105473689606, 0.6042908716038596, 0.6047452782506905, 0.6056349604217327, 0.6044566837841419]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.75 : [0.2766896303300464, 0.30920107719928186, 0.3056142401222637, 0.307017938227757, 0.3151485193007684]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.75 : [0.7323322607555715, 0.7544628189683495, 0.7601744186046512, 0.7616551416462191, 0.747415538740275]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.75 : [0.5891117992908756, 0.6043041156142004, 0.6052017413940128, 0.6061442484628159, 0.6048202504375926]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.75 : [array([0.39491917, 0.39491917, 0.39491917, ..., 0.39491917, 0.39491917,
       0.39491917]), array([0.        , 0.41012299, 0.41012299, ..., 0.41012299, 0.41012299,
       0.41012299]), array([0.39130435, 1.        , 0.39130435, ..., 1.        , 0.39130435,
       0.39130435]), array([0.        , 0.40724785, 0.40724785, ..., 0.        , 0.5       ,
       0.        ]), array([0.39479962, 0.39479962, 0.39479962, ..., 0.39479962, 1.        ,
       1.        ])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.75 : [0.31216591832371177, 0.35201498231254774, 0.3668879182859304, 0.3837142178002649, 0.3884048257372654]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.75 : [0.5656600746562445, 0.5807031587274397, 0.586361278538982, 0.5921480565856864, 0.590044000230061]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.75 : [0.1972173443198703, 0.22778276481149012, 0.23976266462893872, 0.25401249831407635, 0.2604143261582708]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.75 : [0.7483341875961046, 0.7743362831858407, 0.7809663250366032, 0.7840688315292812, 0.763806511137472]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.75 : [0.5668506799515282, 0.5807189982496297, 0.58689017548584, 0.5927247430546205, 0.5904582379605943]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.75 : [array([0.50805271, 0.50805271, 0.50805271, ..., 0.50805271, 0.57979483,
       0.50805271]), array([0.37829362, 0.5145777 , 0.5145777 , ..., 0.5145777 , 0.5145777 ,
       0.5145777 ]), array([0.50498339, 0.78280637, 0.50498339, ..., 0.71574881, 0.50498339,
       0.50498339]), array([0.14642889, 0.50186114, 0.50186114, ..., 0.50785153, 0.52646878,
       0.40793895]), array([0.50148943, 0.50148943, 0.50148943, ..., 0.46765534, 0.88742051,
       0.73843832])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.75 : [0.6466556590547993, 0.6429745471954041, 0.6174966706673463, 0.6164190722247064, 0.6220752214562901]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.75 : [0.49238548379044894, 0.497953694418388, 0.4784763553504524, 0.4808590605849752, 0.48251386686671466]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.75 : [0.9346210995542348, 0.9042190305206463, 0.8441138130983953, 0.8366677156858338, 0.8536377117691997]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.75 : [0.49434375669818287, 0.4988485823944534, 0.486805267523849, 0.4879647595573968, 0.4893353941267388]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.75 : [0.4909564202683901, 0.49793546070643147, 0.47791840581661504, 0.48025223284412727, 0.48204748440375206]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.75 : [array([0.46839783, 0.46839783, 0.46839783, ..., 0.46839783, 0.46839783,
       0.46839783], dtype=float32), array([0.47007084, 0.47007084, 0.47007084, ..., 0.47007084, 0.47007084,
       0.47007084], dtype=float32), array([0.45865524, 0.8216879 , 0.45865524, ..., 0.693115  , 0.45865524,
       0.45865524], dtype=float32), array([0.23363847, 0.4565823 , 0.4565823 , ..., 0.15650691, 0.4565823 ,
       0.1971698 ], dtype=float32), array([0.45553938, 0.45553938, 0.45553938, ..., 0.45553938, 0.9026233 ,
       0.45553938], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.75 : [0.3036789783034613, 0.33715685926346817, 0.3528750570796305, 0.3564891117578988, 0.3623147889292704]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.75 : [0.6610571091722904, 0.6771010248791168, 0.6790265396802401, 0.6809933765747802, 0.6839329421043887]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.75 : [0.781804595553895, 0.8074502466405852, 0.8072966891674702, 0.8101689512272873, 0.8147100424328148]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.75 : [0.18843712008645144, 0.21306104129263914, 0.22578325167438307, 0.22852133255406196, 0.2329573540646205]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.75 : [0.5693191508460123, 0.5811453704950407, 0.5865760064629056, 0.5881917328665679, 0.5905031192495849]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.75 : [array([0.39488015, 0.39488015, 0.39488015, ..., 0.39488015, 0.46625231,
       0.39488015]), array([0.24935759, 0.41007568, 0.41007568, ..., 0.41007568, 0.41007568,
       0.41007568]), array([0.39137421, 0.74845842, 0.39137421, ..., 0.76440019, 0.39137421,
       0.39137421]), array([0.04703455, 0.40698581, 0.40698581, ..., 0.00141196, 0.4918621 ,
       0.19113118]), array([0.39506134, 0.39506134, 0.39506134, ..., 0.39506134, 0.75611786,
       0.68770097])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.75 : [0.36967823043729403, 0.408737896163125, 0.42195810624466473, 0.42324251487166004, 0.43154034229828847]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.75 : [0.5826124499385147, 0.5985000250582666, 0.6044284485670983, 0.6056499128375679, 0.6030946762204695]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.75 : [0.75325394627527, 0.7750344654718636, 0.782608695652174, 0.7867790811339198, 0.7594836371871815]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.75 : [0.24494574271691658, 0.2775583482944345, 0.2888479345529734, 0.28948433214944025, 0.3013975643733429]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.75 : [0.583703603967506, 0.5985144293344105, 0.6049100130155738, 0.6061891297518065, 0.603473811767874]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.01
Logistic F1-score 28.643070691484233
Logistic ROCAUC score: 56.08405404124335
Logistic Recall score: 17.626112759643917
Logistic Precision Score: 76.38888888888889
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[23852  1377]
 [20820  4455]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.53      0.95      0.68     25229
           1       0.76      0.18      0.29     25275

    accuracy                           0.56     50504
   macro avg       0.65      0.56      0.48     50504
weighted avg       0.65      0.56      0.48     50504


Logistic Accuracy Score 56.049025819737054
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.13463354110717773 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.01
DCT F1-score 23.80681247278695
DCT ROCAUC score: 54.99332472612197
DCT Recall score: 14.061325420375864
DCT Precision Score: 77.56438236577914
DCT Confusion Matrix [[24201  1028]
 [21721  3554]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.53      0.96      0.68     25229
           1       0.78      0.14      0.24     25275

    accuracy                           0.55     50504
   macro avg       0.65      0.55      0.46     50504
weighted avg       0.65      0.55      0.46     50504


DCT Accuracy Score 54.95604308569618
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  0.14463591575622559 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.01
Naive F1-score 37.88442240717785
Naive ROCAUC score: 58.35807873273497
Naive Recall score: 25.392680514342235
Naive Precision Score: 74.56721273382131
Naive Confusion Matrix [[23040  2189]
 [18857  6418]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.55      0.91      0.69     25229
           1       0.75      0.25      0.38     25275

    accuracy                           0.58     50504
   macro avg       0.65      0.58      0.53     50504
weighted avg       0.65      0.58      0.53     50504


Naive Accuracy Score 58.32805322350705
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.057845115661621094 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.01
XGB F1-Score 23.233760075865337
XGB ROCAUC Score: 66.72876414742898
XGB Recall score: 80.68689720065866
XGB Precision Score: 13.570722057368942
XGB Confusion Matrix [[24408 21845]
 [  821  3430]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.97      0.53      0.68     46253
           1       0.14      0.81      0.23      4251

    accuracy                           0.55     50504
   macro avg       0.55      0.67      0.46     50504
weighted avg       0.90      0.55      0.64     50504


XGB Accuracy Score 58.32805322350705
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.49567484855651855 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.01
RFC F1 score 29.205329908492534
RFC ROCAUC Score: 56.37703184821103
RFC Recall score: 77.47870528109028
RFC Precision Score: 17.99406528189911
RFC Confusion Matrix [[23907  1322]
 [20727  4548]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.54      0.95      0.68     25229
           1       0.77      0.18      0.29     25275

    accuracy                           0.56     50504
   macro avg       0.66      0.56      0.49     50504
weighted avg       0.66      0.56      0.49     50504


RFC Accuracy Score 56.342071915095836
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  45.87426781654358 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.85 : [array([0.46158505, 0.46158505, 0.46158505, ..., 0.46158505, 0.46158505,
       0.46158505])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.85 : [0.28643070691484235]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5608405404124335]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.85 : [0.17626112759643917]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.85 : [0.7638888888888888]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5604902581973705]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.85 : [array([0.37239583, 0.37239583, 0.37239583, ..., 0.37239583, 0.37239583,
       0.37239583])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.85 : [0.2380681247278695]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5499332472612197]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.85 : [0.14061325420375864]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.85 : [0.7756438236577914]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5495604308569618]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.85 : [array([0.48653199, 0.48653199, 0.48653199, ..., 0.48653199, 0.48653199,
       0.48653199])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.85 : [0.37884422407177853]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5835807873273496]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.85 : [0.25392680514342236]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.85 : [0.7456721273382131]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5832805322350705]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.85 : [array([0.44978365, 0.44978365, 0.44978365, ..., 0.44978365, 0.44978365,
       0.44978365], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.85 : [0.23233760075865337]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.85 : [0.6672876414742898]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.85 : [0.8068689720065867]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.85 : [0.13570722057368942]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5512038650403929]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.85 : [array([0.37210774, 0.37210774, 0.37210774, ..., 0.37210774, 0.37210774,
       0.37210774])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.85 : [0.29205329908492533]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5637703184821103]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.85 : [0.7747870528109029]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.85 : [0.1799406528189911]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5634207191509584]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.02
Logistic F1-score 40.40770493219314
Logistic ROCAUC score: 58.963619707691315
Logistic Recall score: 27.837505454833977
Logistic Precision Score: 73.67702645947081
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[22790  2507]
 [18190  7017]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.90      0.69     25297
           1       0.74      0.28      0.40     25207

    accuracy                           0.59     50504
   macro avg       0.65      0.59      0.55     50504
weighted avg       0.65      0.59      0.55     50504


Logistic Accuracy Score 59.019087597022015
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.27622509002685547 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.02
DCT F1-score 31.343983493294154
DCT ROCAUC score: 56.45115744870014
DCT Recall score: 19.887332883722774
DCT Precision Score: 73.93805309734513
DCT Confusion Matrix [[23530  1767]
 [20194  5013]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.54      0.93      0.68     25297
           1       0.74      0.20      0.31     25207

    accuracy                           0.57     50504
   macro avg       0.64      0.56      0.50     50504
weighted avg       0.64      0.57      0.50     50504


DCT Accuracy Score 56.51631553936321
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  0.22041010856628418 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.02
Naive F1-score 65.4777982966291
Naive ROCAUC score: 50.47796042263359
Naive Recall score: 94.24366247470941
Naive Precision Score: 50.16576919015944
Naive Confusion Matrix [[ 1698 23599]
 [ 1451 23756]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.54      0.07      0.12     25297
           1       0.50      0.94      0.65     25207

    accuracy                           0.50     50504
   macro avg       0.52      0.50      0.39     50504
weighted avg       0.52      0.50      0.39     50504


Naive Accuracy Score 50.399968319341035
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.057845354080200195 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.02
XGB F1-Score 28.249837345478205
XGB ROCAUC Score: 66.03902011386393
XGB Recall score: 78.47460690403037
XGB Precision Score: 17.225373904074264
XGB Confusion Matrix [[24106 20865]
 [ 1191  4342]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.54      0.69     44971
           1       0.17      0.78      0.28      5533

    accuracy                           0.56     50504
   macro avg       0.56      0.66      0.48     50504
weighted avg       0.87      0.56      0.64     50504


XGB Accuracy Score 50.399968319341035
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.5495328903198242 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.02
RFC F1 score 36.801627913936024
RFC ROCAUC Score: 58.12340320152851
RFC Recall score: 74.8964677222899
RFC Precision Score: 24.39401753481176
RFC Confusion Matrix [[23236  2061]
 [19058  6149]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.55      0.92      0.69     25297
           1       0.75      0.24      0.37     25207

    accuracy                           0.58     50504
   macro avg       0.65      0.58      0.53     50504
weighted avg       0.65      0.58      0.53     50504


RFC Accuracy Score 58.18351021701251
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  77.97228145599365 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.85 : [array([0.46158505, 0.46158505, 0.46158505, ..., 0.46158505, 0.46158505,
       0.46158505]), array([0.48452874, 0.48452874, 0.48452874, ..., 0.48452874, 0.48452874,
       0.48452874])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.85 : [0.28643070691484235, 0.4040770493219314]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5608405404124335, 0.5896361970769132]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.85 : [0.17626112759643917, 0.2783750545483398]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.85 : [0.7638888888888888, 0.7367702645947081]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5604902581973705, 0.5901908759702201]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.85 : [array([0.37239583, 0.37239583, 0.37239583, ..., 0.37239583, 0.37239583,
       0.37239583]), array([0.40376851, 0.40376851, 0.40376851, ..., 0.40376851, 0.40376851,
       0.40376851])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.85 : [0.2380681247278695, 0.31343983493294153]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5499332472612197, 0.5645115744870014]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.85 : [0.14061325420375864, 0.19887332883722775]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.85 : [0.7756438236577914, 0.7393805309734514]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5495604308569618, 0.5651631553936322]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.85 : [array([0.48653199, 0.48653199, 0.48653199, ..., 0.48653199, 0.48653199,
       0.48653199]), array([0.50925926, 0.50925926, 0.49999039, ..., 0.50925926, 0.50925926,
       0.50925926])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.85 : [0.37884422407177853, 0.654777982966291]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5835807873273496, 0.5047796042263359]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.85 : [0.25392680514342236, 0.9424366247470941]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.85 : [0.7456721273382131, 0.5016576919015944]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5832805322350705, 0.5039996831934104]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.85 : [array([0.44978365, 0.44978365, 0.44978365, ..., 0.44978365, 0.44978365,
       0.44978365], dtype=float32), array([0.47731975, 0.47731975, 0.47731975, ..., 0.47731975, 0.47731975,
       0.47731975], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.85 : [0.23233760075865337, 0.28249837345478207]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.85 : [0.6672876414742898, 0.6603902011386393]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.85 : [0.8068689720065867, 0.7847460690403036]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.85 : [0.13570722057368942, 0.17225373904074265]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5512038650403929, 0.5632821162680184]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.85 : [array([0.37210774, 0.37210774, 0.37210774, ..., 0.37210774, 0.37210774,
       0.37210774]), array([0.40428575, 0.40428575, 0.40428575, ..., 0.40428575, 0.40428575,
       0.40428575])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.85 : [0.29205329908492533, 0.36801627913936025]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5637703184821103, 0.5812340320152851]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.85 : [0.7747870528109029, 0.748964677222899]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.85 : [0.1799406528189911, 0.2439401753481176]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5634207191509584, 0.5818351021701251]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.03
Logistic F1-score 39.44410736471064
Logistic ROCAUC score: 58.505303035321354
Logistic Recall score: 27.027241051631297
Logistic Precision Score: 72.96632816675574
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[22719  2529]
 [18430  6826]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.55      0.90      0.68     25248
           1       0.73      0.27      0.39     25256

    accuracy                           0.59     50504
   macro avg       0.64      0.59      0.54     50504
weighted avg       0.64      0.59      0.54     50504


Logistic Accuracy Score 58.50031680658958
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.1335887908935547 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.03
DCT F1-score 31.883068520357494
DCT ROCAUC score: 56.54383084264031
DCT Recall score: 20.3397212543554
DCT Precision Score: 73.72273249138921
DCT Confusion Matrix [[23417  1831]
 [20119  5137]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.54      0.93      0.68     25248
           1       0.74      0.20      0.32     25256

    accuracy                           0.57     50504
   macro avg       0.64      0.57      0.50     50504
weighted avg       0.64      0.57      0.50     50504


DCT Accuracy Score 56.53809599239664
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  0.2962064743041992 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.03
Naive F1-score 43.90862244757364
Naive ROCAUC score: 59.700721644580035
Naive Recall score: 31.54497941083307
Naive Precision Score: 72.21064080485814
Naive Confusion Matrix [[22182  3066]
 [17289  7967]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.88      0.69     25248
           1       0.72      0.32      0.44     25256

    accuracy                           0.60     50504
   macro avg       0.64      0.60      0.56     50504
weighted avg       0.64      0.60      0.56     50504


Naive Accuracy Score 59.69626168224299
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.057845354080200195 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.03
XGB F1-Score 30.090526584215223
XGB ROCAUC Score: 65.45493384839426
XGB Recall score: 77.17462393721387
XGB Precision Score: 18.688628444726003
XGB Confusion Matrix [[23852 20536]
 [ 1396  4720]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.94      0.54      0.69     44388
           1       0.19      0.77      0.30      6116

    accuracy                           0.57     50504
   macro avg       0.57      0.65      0.49     50504
weighted avg       0.85      0.57      0.64     50504


XGB Accuracy Score 59.69626168224299
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.5894229412078857 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.03
RFC F1 score 36.60044809559373
RFC ROCAUC Score: 57.98292845018593
RFC Recall score: 74.53461491665652
RFC Precision Score: 24.255622426354133
RFC Confusion Matrix [[23155  2093]
 [19130  6126]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.55      0.92      0.69     25248
           1       0.75      0.24      0.37     25256

    accuracy                           0.58     50504
   macro avg       0.65      0.58      0.53     50504
weighted avg       0.65      0.58      0.53     50504


RFC Accuracy Score 57.977585933787424
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  112.40912771224976 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.85 : [array([0.46158505, 0.46158505, 0.46158505, ..., 0.46158505, 0.46158505,
       0.46158505]), array([0.48452874, 0.48452874, 0.48452874, ..., 0.48452874, 0.48452874,
       0.48452874]), array([0.46899215, 0.52531   , 0.50594982, ..., 0.48299999, 0.68333172,
       0.46899215])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.85 : [0.28643070691484235, 0.4040770493219314, 0.3944410736471064]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5608405404124335, 0.5896361970769132, 0.5850530303532135]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.85 : [0.17626112759643917, 0.2783750545483398, 0.27027241051631296]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.85 : [0.7638888888888888, 0.7367702645947081, 0.7296632816675575]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5604902581973705, 0.5901908759702201, 0.5850031680658958]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.85 : [array([0.37239583, 0.37239583, 0.37239583, ..., 0.37239583, 0.37239583,
       0.37239583]), array([0.40376851, 0.40376851, 0.40376851, ..., 0.40376851, 0.40376851,
       0.40376851]), array([0.39072257, 1.        , 0.39072257, ..., 1.        , 1.        ,
       0.39072257])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.85 : [0.2380681247278695, 0.31343983493294153, 0.31883068520357494]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5499332472612197, 0.5645115744870014, 0.5654383084264031]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.85 : [0.14061325420375864, 0.19887332883722775, 0.203397212543554]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.85 : [0.7756438236577914, 0.7393805309734514, 0.7372273249138921]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5495604308569618, 0.5651631553936322, 0.5653809599239664]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.85 : [array([0.48653199, 0.48653199, 0.48653199, ..., 0.48653199, 0.48653199,
       0.48653199]), array([0.50925926, 0.50925926, 0.49999039, ..., 0.50925926, 0.50925926,
       0.50925926]), array([0.49943883, 0.59510704, 0.58291153, ..., 0.51863823, 0.82335899,
       0.49943883])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.85 : [0.37884422407177853, 0.654777982966291, 0.4390862244757364]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5835807873273496, 0.5047796042263359, 0.5970072164458003]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.85 : [0.25392680514342236, 0.9424366247470941, 0.3154497941083307]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.85 : [0.7456721273382131, 0.5016576919015944, 0.7221064080485815]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5832805322350705, 0.5039996831934104, 0.5969626168224299]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.85 : [array([0.44978365, 0.44978365, 0.44978365, ..., 0.44978365, 0.44978365,
       0.44978365], dtype=float32), array([0.47731975, 0.47731975, 0.47731975, ..., 0.47731975, 0.47731975,
       0.47731975], dtype=float32), array([0.45721152, 0.45721152, 0.45721152, ..., 0.87575406, 0.9774301 ,
       0.45721152], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.85 : [0.23233760075865337, 0.28249837345478207, 0.3009052658421522]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.85 : [0.6672876414742898, 0.6603902011386393, 0.6545493384839426]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.85 : [0.8068689720065867, 0.7847460690403036, 0.7717462393721386]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.85 : [0.13570722057368942, 0.17225373904074265, 0.18688628444726005]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5512038650403929, 0.5632821162680184, 0.5657373673372406]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.85 : [array([0.37210774, 0.37210774, 0.37210774, ..., 0.37210774, 0.37210774,
       0.37210774]), array([0.40428575, 0.40428575, 0.40428575, ..., 0.40428575, 0.40428575,
       0.40428575]), array([0.39124669, 0.35110284, 0.49948119, ..., 0.68016179, 0.81819447,
       0.39124669])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.85 : [0.29205329908492533, 0.36801627913936025, 0.3660044809559373]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5637703184821103, 0.5812340320152851, 0.5798292845018593]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.85 : [0.7747870528109029, 0.748964677222899, 0.7453461491665653]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.85 : [0.1799406528189911, 0.2439401753481176, 0.24255622426354134]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5634207191509584, 0.5818351021701251, 0.5797758593378742]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.05
Logistic F1-score 40.72534072534072
Logistic ROCAUC score: 59.32762017297527
Logistic Recall score: 27.949744362094247
Logistic Precision Score: 75.01329645782363
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[22924  2349]
 [18179  7052]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.91      0.69     25273
           1       0.75      0.28      0.41     25231

    accuracy                           0.59     50504
   macro avg       0.65      0.59      0.55     50504
weighted avg       0.65      0.59      0.55     50504


Logistic Accuracy Score 59.35371455726279
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.1825096607208252 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.05
DCT F1-score 34.42136498516321
DCT ROCAUC score: 57.961596561850726
DCT Recall score: 22.068090840632557
DCT Precision Score: 78.19126527173151
DCT Confusion Matrix [[23720  1553]
 [19663  5568]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.55      0.94      0.69     25273
           1       0.78      0.22      0.34     25231

    accuracy                           0.58     50504
   macro avg       0.66      0.58      0.52     50504
weighted avg       0.66      0.58      0.52     50504


DCT Accuracy Score 57.99144622208142
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  0.42192697525024414 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.05
Naive F1-score 45.6727870649493
Naive ROCAUC score: 60.72462958388418
Naive Recall score: 33.02683207165788
Naive Precision Score: 74.01190158983924
Naive Confusion Matrix [[22347  2926]
 [16898  8333]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.57      0.88      0.69     25273
           1       0.74      0.33      0.46     25231

    accuracy                           0.61     50504
   macro avg       0.65      0.61      0.57     50504
weighted avg       0.65      0.61      0.57     50504


Naive Accuracy Score 60.747663551401864
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.05884408950805664 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.05
XGB F1-Score 33.83128021206923
XGB ROCAUC Score: 67.00589343051575
XGB Recall score: 79.36786654960491
XGB Precision Score: 21.497364353374817
XGB Confusion Matrix [[23863 19807]
 [ 1410  5424]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.94      0.55      0.69     43670
           1       0.21      0.79      0.34      6834

    accuracy                           0.58     50504
   macro avg       0.58      0.67      0.52     50504
weighted avg       0.85      0.58      0.64     50504


XGB Accuracy Score 60.747663551401864
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.5943725109100342 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.05
RFC F1 score 39.11647541470955
RFC ROCAUC Score: 59.42102545776593
RFC Recall score: 78.2562150588795
RFC Precision Score: 26.075066386587924
RFC Confusion Matrix [[23445  1828]
 [18652  6579]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.93      0.70     25273
           1       0.78      0.26      0.39     25231

    accuracy                           0.59     50504
   macro avg       0.67      0.59      0.54     50504
weighted avg       0.67      0.59      0.54     50504


RFC Accuracy Score 59.4487565341359
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  189.01114153862 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.85 : [array([0.46158505, 0.46158505, 0.46158505, ..., 0.46158505, 0.46158505,
       0.46158505]), array([0.48452874, 0.48452874, 0.48452874, ..., 0.48452874, 0.48452874,
       0.48452874]), array([0.46899215, 0.52531   , 0.50594982, ..., 0.48299999, 0.68333172,
       0.46899215]), array([0.45675212, 0.45675212, 0.45675212, ..., 0.45675212, 0.74065847,
       0.45675212])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.85 : [0.28643070691484235, 0.4040770493219314, 0.3944410736471064, 0.40725340725340725]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5608405404124335, 0.5896361970769132, 0.5850530303532135, 0.5932762017297527]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.85 : [0.17626112759643917, 0.2783750545483398, 0.27027241051631296, 0.2794974436209425]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.85 : [0.7638888888888888, 0.7367702645947081, 0.7296632816675575, 0.7501329645782363]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5604902581973705, 0.5901908759702201, 0.5850031680658958, 0.5935371455726279]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.85 : [array([0.37239583, 0.37239583, 0.37239583, ..., 0.37239583, 0.37239583,
       0.37239583]), array([0.40376851, 0.40376851, 0.40376851, ..., 0.40376851, 0.40376851,
       0.40376851]), array([0.39072257, 1.        , 0.39072257, ..., 1.        , 1.        ,
       0.39072257]), array([0.38095238, 0.38095238, 0.38095238, ..., 0.38095238, 1.        ,
       0.38095238])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.85 : [0.2380681247278695, 0.31343983493294153, 0.31883068520357494, 0.3442136498516321]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5499332472612197, 0.5645115744870014, 0.5654383084264031, 0.5796159656185073]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.85 : [0.14061325420375864, 0.19887332883722775, 0.203397212543554, 0.22068090840632557]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.85 : [0.7756438236577914, 0.7393805309734514, 0.7372273249138921, 0.781912652717315]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5495604308569618, 0.5651631553936322, 0.5653809599239664, 0.5799144622208142]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.85 : [array([0.48653199, 0.48653199, 0.48653199, ..., 0.48653199, 0.48653199,
       0.48653199]), array([0.50925926, 0.50925926, 0.49999039, ..., 0.50925926, 0.50925926,
       0.50925926]), array([0.49943883, 0.59510704, 0.58291153, ..., 0.51863823, 0.82335899,
       0.49943883]), array([0.49461279, 0.49461279, 0.49461279, ..., 0.49461279, 0.85571455,
       0.49461279])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.85 : [0.37884422407177853, 0.654777982966291, 0.4390862244757364, 0.45672787064949294]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5835807873273496, 0.5047796042263359, 0.5970072164458003, 0.6072462958388418]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.85 : [0.25392680514342236, 0.9424366247470941, 0.3154497941083307, 0.3302683207165788]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.85 : [0.7456721273382131, 0.5016576919015944, 0.7221064080485815, 0.7401190158983924]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5832805322350705, 0.5039996831934104, 0.5969626168224299, 0.6074766355140186]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.85 : [array([0.44978365, 0.44978365, 0.44978365, ..., 0.44978365, 0.44978365,
       0.44978365], dtype=float32), array([0.47731975, 0.47731975, 0.47731975, ..., 0.47731975, 0.47731975,
       0.47731975], dtype=float32), array([0.45721152, 0.45721152, 0.45721152, ..., 0.87575406, 0.9774301 ,
       0.45721152], dtype=float32), array([0.44775292, 0.44775292, 0.44775292, ..., 0.44775292, 0.9715891 ,
       0.44775292], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.85 : [0.23233760075865337, 0.28249837345478207, 0.3009052658421522, 0.3383128021206923]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.85 : [0.6672876414742898, 0.6603902011386393, 0.6545493384839426, 0.6700589343051576]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.85 : [0.8068689720065867, 0.7847460690403036, 0.7717462393721386, 0.7936786654960492]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.85 : [0.13570722057368942, 0.17225373904074265, 0.18688628444726005, 0.21497364353374818]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5512038650403929, 0.5632821162680184, 0.5657373673372406, 0.5798946618089657]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.85 : [array([0.37210774, 0.37210774, 0.37210774, ..., 0.37210774, 0.37210774,
       0.37210774]), array([0.40428575, 0.40428575, 0.40428575, ..., 0.40428575, 0.40428575,
       0.40428575]), array([0.39124669, 0.35110284, 0.49948119, ..., 0.68016179, 0.81819447,
       0.39124669]), array([0.38052398, 0.38052398, 0.38052398, ..., 0.38052398, 0.91911271,
       0.38052398])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.85 : [0.29205329908492533, 0.36801627913936025, 0.3660044809559373, 0.3911647541470955]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5637703184821103, 0.5812340320152851, 0.5798292845018593, 0.5942102545776593]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.85 : [0.7747870528109029, 0.748964677222899, 0.7453461491665653, 0.7825621505887951]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.85 : [0.1799406528189911, 0.2439401753481176, 0.24255622426354134, 0.26075066386587925]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5634207191509584, 0.5818351021701251, 0.5797758593378742, 0.594487565341359]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.07
Logistic F1-score 42.98969949774411
Logistic ROCAUC score: 60.2142069015562
Logistic Recall score: 30.002376425855516
Logistic Precision Score: 75.80306214350045
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[22838  2418]
 [17673  7575]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.90      0.69     25256
           1       0.76      0.30      0.43     25248

    accuracy                           0.60     50504
   macro avg       0.66      0.60      0.56     50504
weighted avg       0.66      0.60      0.56     50504


Logistic Accuracy Score 60.21899255504515
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.14560985565185547 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.07
DCT F1-score 36.30249045628067
DCT ROCAUC score: 58.366127433032524
DCT Recall score: 23.72861216730038
DCT Precision Score: 77.22351121423047
DCT Confusion Matrix [[23489  1767]
 [19257  5991]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.55      0.93      0.69     25256
           1       0.77      0.24      0.36     25248

    accuracy                           0.58     50504
   macro avg       0.66      0.58      0.53     50504
weighted avg       0.66      0.58      0.53     50504


DCT Accuracy Score 58.37161412957389
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  0.4946737289428711 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.07
Naive F1-score 61.74576467857972
Naive ROCAUC score: 47.784178604248396
Naive Recall score: 84.3037072243346
Naive Precision Score: 48.711552544855365
Naive Confusion Matrix [[ 2845 22411]
 [ 3963 21285]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.42      0.11      0.18     25256
           1       0.49      0.84      0.62     25248

    accuracy                           0.48     50504
   macro avg       0.45      0.48      0.40     50504
weighted avg       0.45      0.48      0.40     50504


Naive Accuracy Score 47.77839379059085
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.054853200912475586 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.07
XGB F1-Score 35.37615580745246
XGB ROCAUC Score: 66.85296952538337
XGB Recall score: 78.8227241615332
XGB Precision Score: 22.80576679340938
XGB Confusion Matrix [[23709 19490]
 [ 1547  5758]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.94      0.55      0.69     43199
           1       0.23      0.79      0.35      7305

    accuracy                           0.58     50504
   macro avg       0.58      0.67      0.52     50504
weighted avg       0.84      0.58      0.64     50504


XGB Accuracy Score 47.77839379059085
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.6283180713653564 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.85 0.07
RFC F1 score 41.35877421220006
RFC ROCAUC Score: 59.831854760359114
RFC Recall score: 76.56818668379361
RFC Precision Score: 28.330956907477823
RFC Confusion Matrix [[23067  2189]
 [18095  7153]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.91      0.69     25256
           1       0.77      0.28      0.41     25248

    accuracy                           0.60     50504
   macro avg       0.66      0.60      0.55     50504
weighted avg       0.66      0.60      0.55     50504


RFC Accuracy Score 59.83684460636781
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  265.47942066192627 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.85 : [array([0.46158505, 0.46158505, 0.46158505, ..., 0.46158505, 0.46158505,
       0.46158505]), array([0.48452874, 0.48452874, 0.48452874, ..., 0.48452874, 0.48452874,
       0.48452874]), array([0.46899215, 0.52531   , 0.50594982, ..., 0.48299999, 0.68333172,
       0.46899215]), array([0.45675212, 0.45675212, 0.45675212, ..., 0.45675212, 0.74065847,
       0.45675212]), array([0.46997214, 0.46444622, 0.46444622, ..., 0.46444622, 0.46444622,
       0.46444622])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.85 : [0.28643070691484235, 0.4040770493219314, 0.3944410736471064, 0.40725340725340725, 0.4298969949774411]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5608405404124335, 0.5896361970769132, 0.5850530303532135, 0.5932762017297527, 0.602142069015562]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.85 : [0.17626112759643917, 0.2783750545483398, 0.27027241051631296, 0.2794974436209425, 0.30002376425855515]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.85 : [0.7638888888888888, 0.7367702645947081, 0.7296632816675575, 0.7501329645782363, 0.7580306214350045]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5604902581973705, 0.5901908759702201, 0.5850031680658958, 0.5935371455726279, 0.6021899255504515]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.85 : [array([0.37239583, 0.37239583, 0.37239583, ..., 0.37239583, 0.37239583,
       0.37239583]), array([0.40376851, 0.40376851, 0.40376851, ..., 0.40376851, 0.40376851,
       0.40376851]), array([0.39072257, 1.        , 0.39072257, ..., 1.        , 1.        ,
       0.39072257]), array([0.38095238, 0.38095238, 0.38095238, ..., 0.38095238, 1.        ,
       0.38095238]), array([0.        , 0.39552522, 0.39552522, ..., 0.39552522, 0.39552522,
       0.39552522])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.85 : [0.2380681247278695, 0.31343983493294153, 0.31883068520357494, 0.3442136498516321, 0.3630249045628067]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5499332472612197, 0.5645115744870014, 0.5654383084264031, 0.5796159656185073, 0.5836612743303252]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.85 : [0.14061325420375864, 0.19887332883722775, 0.203397212543554, 0.22068090840632557, 0.2372861216730038]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.85 : [0.7756438236577914, 0.7393805309734514, 0.7372273249138921, 0.781912652717315, 0.7722351121423047]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5495604308569618, 0.5651631553936322, 0.5653809599239664, 0.5799144622208142, 0.5837161412957389]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.85 : [array([0.48653199, 0.48653199, 0.48653199, ..., 0.48653199, 0.48653199,
       0.48653199]), array([0.50925926, 0.50925926, 0.49999039, ..., 0.50925926, 0.50925926,
       0.50925926]), array([0.49943883, 0.59510704, 0.58291153, ..., 0.51863823, 0.82335899,
       0.49943883]), array([0.49461279, 0.49461279, 0.49461279, ..., 0.49461279, 0.85571455,
       0.49461279]), array([0.54214456, 0.50348642, 0.50348642, ..., 0.50348642, 0.50348642,
       0.50348642])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.85 : [0.37884422407177853, 0.654777982966291, 0.4390862244757364, 0.45672787064949294, 0.6174576467857972]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5835807873273496, 0.5047796042263359, 0.5970072164458003, 0.6072462958388418, 0.47784178604248395]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.85 : [0.25392680514342236, 0.9424366247470941, 0.3154497941083307, 0.3302683207165788, 0.843037072243346]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.85 : [0.7456721273382131, 0.5016576919015944, 0.7221064080485815, 0.7401190158983924, 0.48711552544855363]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5832805322350705, 0.5039996831934104, 0.5969626168224299, 0.6074766355140186, 0.47778393790590845]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.85 : [array([0.44978365, 0.44978365, 0.44978365, ..., 0.44978365, 0.44978365,
       0.44978365], dtype=float32), array([0.47731975, 0.47731975, 0.47731975, ..., 0.47731975, 0.47731975,
       0.47731975], dtype=float32), array([0.45721152, 0.45721152, 0.45721152, ..., 0.87575406, 0.9774301 ,
       0.45721152], dtype=float32), array([0.44775292, 0.44775292, 0.44775292, ..., 0.44775292, 0.9715891 ,
       0.44775292], dtype=float32), array([0.45625734, 0.45625734, 0.45625734, ..., 0.45625734, 0.45625734,
       0.45625734], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.85 : [0.23233760075865337, 0.28249837345478207, 0.3009052658421522, 0.3383128021206923, 0.35376155807452464]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.85 : [0.6672876414742898, 0.6603902011386393, 0.6545493384839426, 0.6700589343051576, 0.6685296952538338]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.85 : [0.8068689720065867, 0.7847460690403036, 0.7717462393721386, 0.7936786654960492, 0.788227241615332]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.85 : [0.13570722057368942, 0.17225373904074265, 0.18688628444726005, 0.21497364353374818, 0.2280576679340938]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5512038650403929, 0.5632821162680184, 0.5657373673372406, 0.5798946618089657, 0.5834587359417076]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.85 : [array([0.37210774, 0.37210774, 0.37210774, ..., 0.37210774, 0.37210774,
       0.37210774]), array([0.40428575, 0.40428575, 0.40428575, ..., 0.40428575, 0.40428575,
       0.40428575]), array([0.39124669, 0.35110284, 0.49948119, ..., 0.68016179, 0.81819447,
       0.39124669]), array([0.38052398, 0.38052398, 0.38052398, ..., 0.38052398, 0.91911271,
       0.38052398]), array([0.19185052, 0.39585604, 0.39585604, ..., 0.39585604, 0.39585604,
       0.39585604])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.85 : [0.29205329908492533, 0.36801627913936025, 0.3660044809559373, 0.3911647541470955, 0.4135877421220006]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5637703184821103, 0.5812340320152851, 0.5798292845018593, 0.5942102545776593, 0.5983185476035912]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.85 : [0.7747870528109029, 0.748964677222899, 0.7453461491665653, 0.7825621505887951, 0.7656818668379362]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.85 : [0.1799406528189911, 0.2439401753481176, 0.24255622426354134, 0.26075066386587925, 0.2833095690747782]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.85 : [0.5634207191509584, 0.5818351021701251, 0.5797758593378742, 0.594487565341359, 0.5983684460636781]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.005
Logistic F1-score 37.407407407407405
Logistic ROCAUC score: 58.11783647112148
Logistic Recall score: 25.02477700693756
Logistic Precision Score: 74.04692082111437
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[25716  2478]
 [21182  7070]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.55      0.91      0.68     28194
           1       0.74      0.25      0.37     28252

    accuracy                           0.58     56446
   macro avg       0.64      0.58      0.53     56446
weighted avg       0.64      0.58      0.53     56446


Logistic Accuracy Score 58.08383233532935
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.11564445495605469 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.005
DCT F1-score 19.955952526612013
DCT ROCAUC score: 53.683945645465194
DCT Recall score: 11.546085232903865
DCT Precision Score: 73.46846846846847
DCT Confusion Matrix [[27016  1178]
 [24990  3262]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.52      0.96      0.67     28194
           1       0.73      0.12      0.20     28252

    accuracy                           0.54     56446
   macro avg       0.63      0.54      0.44     56446
weighted avg       0.63      0.54      0.44     56446


DCT Accuracy Score 53.64064769868547
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  0.1266920566558838 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.005
Naive F1-score 66.08281217868851
Naive ROCAUC score: 50.27829257293605
Naive Recall score: 96.68342064278636
Naive Precision Score: 50.195710899167544
Naive Confusion Matrix [[ 1092 27102]
 [  937 27315]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.54      0.04      0.07     28194
           1       0.50      0.97      0.66     28252

    accuracy                           0.50     56446
   macro avg       0.52      0.50      0.37     56446
weighted avg       0.52      0.50      0.37     56446


Naive Accuracy Score 50.32597526839812
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.06783699989318848 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.005
XGB F1-Score 13.332899954495222
XGB ROCAUC Score: 66.50079365683449
XGB Recall score: 81.58313444709626
XGB Precision Score: 7.259663032705649
XGB Confusion Matrix [[27731 26201]
 [  463  2051]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.98      0.51      0.68     53932
           1       0.07      0.82      0.13      2514

    accuracy                           0.53     56446
   macro avg       0.53      0.67      0.40     56446
weighted avg       0.94      0.53      0.65     56446


XGB Accuracy Score 50.32597526839812
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.3320786952972412 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.005
RFC F1 score 25.481393975191967
RFC ROCAUC Score: 55.340043209649814
RFC Recall score: 76.92582025677603
RFC Precision Score: 15.26971541837746
RFC Confusion Matrix [[26900  1294]
 [23938  4314]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.53      0.95      0.68     28194
           1       0.77      0.15      0.25     28252

    accuracy                           0.55     56446
   macro avg       0.65      0.55      0.47     56446
weighted avg       0.65      0.55      0.47     56446


RFC Accuracy Score 55.298869716188925
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  30.58019995689392 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.95 : [array([0.51900698, 0.49644018, 0.62059903, ..., 0.49644018, 0.49644018,
       0.49644018])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.95 : [0.37407407407407406]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5811783647112148]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.95 : [0.2502477700693756]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.95 : [0.7404692082111437]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5808383233532934]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.95 : [array([1.       , 0.3956044, 1.       , ..., 0.3956044, 0.3956044,
       0.3956044])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.95 : [0.1995595252661201]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5368394564546519]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.95 : [0.11546085232903865]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.95 : [0.7346846846846847]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5364064769868547]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.95 : [array([0.55739602, 0.51515152, 0.71005438, ..., 0.51373936, 0.51515152,
       0.51515152])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.95 : [0.6608281217868851]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5027829257293606]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.95 : [0.9668342064278636]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5019571089916754]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5032597526839812]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.95 : [array([0.661596  , 0.49940813, 0.49940813, ..., 0.49940813, 0.49940813,
       0.49940813], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.95 : [0.13332899954495223]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.95 : [0.6650079365683449]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.95 : [0.8158313444709626]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.95 : [0.07259663032705649]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5276193175778621]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.95 : [array([0.51139182, 0.39604264, 0.67277563, ..., 0.39604264, 0.39604264,
       0.39604264])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.95 : [0.2548139397519197]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5534004320964981]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.95 : [0.7692582025677603]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.95 : [0.1526971541837746]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5529886971618893]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.01
Logistic F1-score 39.09900033931042
Logistic ROCAUC score: 58.65404588243797
Logistic Recall score: 26.546163388268653
Logistic Precision Score: 74.1731035848683
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[25623  2608]
 [20725  7490]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.55      0.91      0.69     28231
           1       0.74      0.27      0.39     28215

    accuracy                           0.59     56446
   macro avg       0.65      0.59      0.54     56446
weighted avg       0.65      0.59      0.54     56446


Logistic Accuracy Score 58.66314707862382
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.12560701370239258 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.01
DCT F1-score 24.71385052201946
DCT ROCAUC score: 54.892439580995834
DCT Recall score: 14.807726386673755
DCT Precision Score: 74.66047176554682
DCT Confusion Matrix [[26813  1418]
 [24037  4178]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.53      0.95      0.68     28231
           1       0.75      0.15      0.25     28215

    accuracy                           0.55     56446
   macro avg       0.64      0.55      0.46     56446
weighted avg       0.64      0.55      0.46     56446


DCT Accuracy Score 54.90380186372816
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  0.14666104316711426 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.01
Naive F1-score 65.56507498075067
Naive ROCAUC score: 50.097783699908284
Naive Recall score: 95.06645401382244
Naive Precision Score: 50.03730925642652
Naive Confusion Matrix [[ 1448 26783]
 [ 1392 26823]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.51      0.05      0.09     28231
           1       0.50      0.95      0.66     28215

    accuracy                           0.50     56446
   macro avg       0.51      0.50      0.37     56446
weighted avg       0.51      0.50      0.37     56446


Naive Accuracy Score 50.085037026538636
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.06586122512817383 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.01
XGB F1-Score 24.789054966248795
XGB ROCAUC Score: 67.97614174605557
XGB Recall score: 82.77319380156973
XGB Precision Score: 14.577352472089315
XGB Confusion Matrix [[27375 24102]
 [  856  4113]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.97      0.53      0.69     51477
           1       0.15      0.83      0.25      4969

    accuracy                           0.56     56446
   macro avg       0.56      0.68      0.47     56446
weighted avg       0.90      0.56      0.65     56446


XGB Accuracy Score 50.085037026538636
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.5325407981872559 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.01
RFC F1 score 32.55503297804246
RFC ROCAUC Score: 57.05486312439475
RFC Recall score: 75.7838818346722
RFC Precision Score: 20.73010809852915
RFC Confusion Matrix [[26362  1869]
 [22366  5849]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.54      0.93      0.69     28231
           1       0.76      0.21      0.33     28215

    accuracy                           0.57     56446
   macro avg       0.65      0.57      0.51     56446
weighted avg       0.65      0.57      0.51     56446


RFC Accuracy Score 57.065159621585224
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  44.189722537994385 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.95 : [array([0.51900698, 0.49644018, 0.62059903, ..., 0.49644018, 0.49644018,
       0.49644018]), array([0.49725044, 0.54859563, 0.49725044, ..., 0.49725044, 0.49725044,
       0.49725044])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.95 : [0.37407407407407406, 0.3909900033931042]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5811783647112148, 0.5865404588243797]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.95 : [0.2502477700693756, 0.2654616338826865]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.95 : [0.7404692082111437, 0.7417310358486829]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5808383233532934, 0.5866314707862382]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.95 : [array([1.       , 0.3956044, 1.       , ..., 0.3956044, 0.3956044,
       0.3956044]), array([0.42287234, 1.        , 0.42287234, ..., 0.42287234, 0.42287234,
       0.42287234])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.95 : [0.1995595252661201, 0.2471385052201946]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5368394564546519, 0.5489243958099583]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.95 : [0.11546085232903865, 0.14807726386673756]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.95 : [0.7346846846846847, 0.7466047176554682]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5364064769868547, 0.5490380186372816]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.95 : [array([0.55739602, 0.51515152, 0.71005438, ..., 0.51373936, 0.51515152,
       0.51515152]), array([0.51683502, 0.61829557, 0.51683502, ..., 0.51683502, 0.51683502,
       0.51683502])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.95 : [0.6608281217868851, 0.6556507498075067]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5027829257293606, 0.5009778369990828]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.95 : [0.9668342064278636, 0.9506645401382243]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5019571089916754, 0.5003730925642652]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5032597526839812, 0.5008503702653864]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.95 : [array([0.661596  , 0.49940813, 0.49940813, ..., 0.49940813, 0.49940813,
       0.49940813], dtype=float32), array([0.48380703, 0.9575192 , 0.48380703, ..., 0.48380703, 0.48380703,
       0.48380703], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.95 : [0.13332899954495223, 0.24789054966248794]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.95 : [0.6650079365683449, 0.6797614174605557]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.95 : [0.8158313444709626, 0.8277319380156973]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.95 : [0.07259663032705649, 0.14577352472089314]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5276193175778621, 0.5578428940934699]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.95 : [array([0.51139182, 0.39604264, 0.67277563, ..., 0.39604264, 0.39604264,
       0.39604264]), array([0.42482087, 0.64472618, 0.42482087, ..., 0.42482087, 0.42482087,
       0.42482087])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.95 : [0.2548139397519197, 0.32555032978042464]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5534004320964981, 0.5705486312439475]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.95 : [0.7692582025677603, 0.757838818346722]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.95 : [0.1526971541837746, 0.2073010809852915]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5529886971618893, 0.5706515962158523]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.015
Logistic F1-score 34.12489483540044
Logistic ROCAUC score: 57.02123946054467
Logistic Recall score: 22.261171305148363
Logistic Precision Score: 73.06217315514236
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[25886  2318]
 [21955  6287]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.54      0.92      0.68     28204
           1       0.73      0.22      0.34     28242

    accuracy                           0.57     56446
   macro avg       0.64      0.57      0.51     56446
weighted avg       0.64      0.57      0.51     56446


Logistic Accuracy Score 56.99783864224214
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.12566375732421875 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.015
DCT F1-score 26.618495425674492
DCT ROCAUC score: 55.40677509055671
DCT Recall score: 16.1744918915091
DCT Precision Score: 75.13157894736841
DCT Confusion Matrix [[26692  1512]
 [23674  4568]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.53      0.95      0.68     28204
           1       0.75      0.16      0.27     28242

    accuracy                           0.55     56446
   macro avg       0.64      0.55      0.47     56446
weighted avg       0.64      0.55      0.47     56446


DCT Accuracy Score 55.38036353328846
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  0.20251011848449707 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.015
Naive F1-score 41.11294625841697
Naive ROCAUC score: 58.96347112744621
Naive Recall score: 28.645280079314496
Naive Precision Score: 72.79762440385134
Naive Confusion Matrix [[25181  3023]
 [20152  8090]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.89      0.68     28204
           1       0.73      0.29      0.41     28242

    accuracy                           0.59     56446
   macro avg       0.64      0.59      0.55     56446
weighted avg       0.64      0.59      0.55     56446


Naive Accuracy Score 58.9430606243135
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.06283211708068848 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.015
XGB F1-Score 26.56526353024408
XGB ROCAUC Score: 66.27275879263897
XGB Recall score: 79.30306230200634
XGB Precision Score: 15.954960696834503
XGB Confusion Matrix [[27028 23736]
 [ 1176  4506]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.96      0.53      0.68     50764
           1       0.16      0.79      0.27      5682

    accuracy                           0.56     56446
   macro avg       0.56      0.66      0.48     56446
weighted avg       0.88      0.56      0.64     56446


XGB Accuracy Score 58.9430606243135
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.5654861927032471 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.015
RFC F1 score 32.69182704323919
RFC ROCAUC Score: 57.086016710266875
RFC Recall score: 75.7821552723059
RFC Precision Score: 20.84130019120459
RFC Confusion Matrix [[26323  1881]
 [22356  5886]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.54      0.93      0.68     28204
           1       0.76      0.21      0.33     28242

    accuracy                           0.57     56446
   macro avg       0.65      0.57      0.51     56446
weighted avg       0.65      0.57      0.51     56446


RFC Accuracy Score 57.06161641214612
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  69.1458888053894 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.95 : [array([0.51900698, 0.49644018, 0.62059903, ..., 0.49644018, 0.49644018,
       0.49644018]), array([0.49725044, 0.54859563, 0.49725044, ..., 0.49725044, 0.49725044,
       0.49725044]), array([0.46756547, 0.46756547, 0.51680696, ..., 0.49088417, 0.55275699,
       0.51506911])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.95 : [0.37407407407407406, 0.3909900033931042, 0.3412489483540044]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5811783647112148, 0.5865404588243797, 0.5702123946054467]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.95 : [0.2502477700693756, 0.2654616338826865, 0.2226117130514836]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.95 : [0.7404692082111437, 0.7417310358486829, 0.7306217315514236]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5808383233532934, 0.5866314707862382, 0.5699783864224214]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.95 : [array([1.       , 0.3956044, 1.       , ..., 0.3956044, 0.3956044,
       0.3956044]), array([0.42287234, 1.        , 0.42287234, ..., 0.42287234, 0.42287234,
       0.42287234]), array([0.38543517, 0.38543517, 1.        , ..., 0.38543517, 0.66666667,
       0.38543517])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.95 : [0.1995595252661201, 0.2471385052201946, 0.26618495425674493]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5368394564546519, 0.5489243958099583, 0.554067750905567]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.95 : [0.11546085232903865, 0.14807726386673756, 0.161744918915091]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.95 : [0.7346846846846847, 0.7466047176554682, 0.7513157894736842]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5364064769868547, 0.5490380186372816, 0.5538036353328846]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.95 : [array([0.55739602, 0.51515152, 0.71005438, ..., 0.51373936, 0.51515152,
       0.51515152]), array([0.51683502, 0.61829557, 0.51683502, ..., 0.51683502, 0.51683502,
       0.51683502]), array([0.49046016, 0.49046016, 0.57379464, ..., 0.53879285, 0.58809522,
       0.54393788])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.95 : [0.6608281217868851, 0.6556507498075067, 0.4111294625841697]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5027829257293606, 0.5009778369990828, 0.5896347112744621]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.95 : [0.9668342064278636, 0.9506645401382243, 0.28645280079314495]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5019571089916754, 0.5003730925642652, 0.7279762440385135]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5032597526839812, 0.5008503702653864, 0.589430606243135]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.95 : [array([0.661596  , 0.49940813, 0.49940813, ..., 0.49940813, 0.49940813,
       0.49940813], dtype=float32), array([0.48380703, 0.9575192 , 0.48380703, ..., 0.48380703, 0.48380703,
       0.48380703], dtype=float32), array([0.45913708, 0.45913708, 0.45913708, ..., 0.45913708, 0.45913708,
       0.7879859 ], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.95 : [0.13332899954495223, 0.24789054966248794, 0.2656526353024408]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.95 : [0.6650079365683449, 0.6797614174605557, 0.6627275879263896]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.95 : [0.8158313444709626, 0.8277319380156973, 0.7930306230200633]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.95 : [0.07259663032705649, 0.14577352472089314, 0.15954960696834503]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5276193175778621, 0.5578428940934699, 0.5586578322644652]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.95 : [array([0.51139182, 0.39604264, 0.67277563, ..., 0.39604264, 0.39604264,
       0.39604264]), array([0.42482087, 0.64472618, 0.42482087, ..., 0.42482087, 0.42482087,
       0.42482087]), array([0.38489872, 0.38489872, 0.55105871, ..., 0.46983432, 0.66781159,
       0.56317867])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.95 : [0.2548139397519197, 0.32555032978042464, 0.3269182704323919]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5534004320964981, 0.5705486312439475, 0.5708601671026687]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.95 : [0.7692582025677603, 0.757838818346722, 0.7578215527230591]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.95 : [0.1526971541837746, 0.2073010809852915, 0.2084130019120459]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5529886971618893, 0.5706515962158523, 0.5706161641214612]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.02
Logistic F1-score 40.946961999593576
Logistic ROCAUC score: 58.76670767511888
Logistic Recall score: 28.6028602860286
Logistic Precision Score: 72.03503440879435
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[25138  3129]
 [20119  8060]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.89      0.68     28267
           1       0.72      0.29      0.41     28179

    accuracy                           0.59     56446
   macro avg       0.64      0.59      0.55     56446
weighted avg       0.64      0.59      0.55     56446


Logistic Accuracy Score 58.81373347978599
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.12167668342590332 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.02
DCT F1-score 29.72904102607662
DCT ROCAUC score: 55.9723267200373
DCT Recall score: 18.630895347599278
DCT Precision Score: 73.52941176470588
DCT Confusion Matrix [[26377  1890]
 [22929  5250]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.53      0.93      0.68     28267
           1       0.74      0.19      0.30     28179

    accuracy                           0.56     56446
   macro avg       0.64      0.56      0.49     56446
weighted avg       0.63      0.56      0.49     56446


DCT Accuracy Score 56.03054246536513
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  0.23540449142456055 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.02
Naive F1-score 65.23826479869356
Naive ROCAUC score: 49.913260646154036
Naive Recall score: 94.27587920082331
Naive Precision Score: 49.876088915590266
Naive Confusion Matrix [[ 1569 26698]
 [ 1613 26566]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.49      0.06      0.10     28267
           1       0.50      0.94      0.65     28179

    accuracy                           0.50     56446
   macro avg       0.50      0.50      0.38     56446
weighted avg       0.50      0.50      0.38     56446


Naive Accuracy Score 49.84409878467916
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.06183433532714844 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.02
XGB F1-Score 29.335260115606935
XGB ROCAUC Score: 66.42631277415335
XGB Recall score: 79.03753309453356
XGB Precision Score: 18.0098655026793
XGB Confusion Matrix [[26921 23104]
 [ 1346  5075]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.95      0.54      0.69     50025
           1       0.18      0.79      0.29      6421

    accuracy                           0.57     56446
   macro avg       0.57      0.66      0.49     56446
weighted avg       0.86      0.57      0.64     56446


XGB Accuracy Score 49.84409878467916
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.6123611927032471 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.02
RFC F1 score 36.65927963047019
RFC ROCAUC Score: 57.919904234611096
RFC Recall score: 74.0241535475523
RFC Precision Score: 24.36211363071791
RFC Confusion Matrix [[25858  2409]
 [21314  6865]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.55      0.91      0.69     28267
           1       0.74      0.24      0.37     28179

    accuracy                           0.58     56446
   macro avg       0.64      0.58      0.53     56446
weighted avg       0.64      0.58      0.53     56446


RFC Accuracy Score 57.97222123799738
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  84.49390125274658 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.95 : [array([0.51900698, 0.49644018, 0.62059903, ..., 0.49644018, 0.49644018,
       0.49644018]), array([0.49725044, 0.54859563, 0.49725044, ..., 0.49725044, 0.49725044,
       0.49725044]), array([0.46756547, 0.46756547, 0.51680696, ..., 0.49088417, 0.55275699,
       0.51506911]), array([0.48291383, 0.48291383, 0.48291383, ..., 0.48291383, 0.48291383,
       0.48291383])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.95 : [0.37407407407407406, 0.3909900033931042, 0.3412489483540044, 0.4094696199959358]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5811783647112148, 0.5865404588243797, 0.5702123946054467, 0.5876670767511888]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.95 : [0.2502477700693756, 0.2654616338826865, 0.2226117130514836, 0.28602860286028603]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.95 : [0.7404692082111437, 0.7417310358486829, 0.7306217315514236, 0.7203503440879435]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5808383233532934, 0.5866314707862382, 0.5699783864224214, 0.5881373347978599]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.95 : [array([1.       , 0.3956044, 1.       , ..., 0.3956044, 0.3956044,
       0.3956044]), array([0.42287234, 1.        , 0.42287234, ..., 0.42287234, 0.42287234,
       0.42287234]), array([0.38543517, 0.38543517, 1.        , ..., 0.38543517, 0.66666667,
       0.38543517]), array([0.39869281, 0.39869281, 0.39869281, ..., 0.39869281, 0.39869281,
       0.39869281])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.95 : [0.1995595252661201, 0.2471385052201946, 0.26618495425674493, 0.2972904102607662]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5368394564546519, 0.5489243958099583, 0.554067750905567, 0.559723267200373]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.95 : [0.11546085232903865, 0.14807726386673756, 0.161744918915091, 0.18630895347599277]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.95 : [0.7346846846846847, 0.7466047176554682, 0.7513157894736842, 0.7352941176470589]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5364064769868547, 0.5490380186372816, 0.5538036353328846, 0.5603054246536513]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.95 : [array([0.55739602, 0.51515152, 0.71005438, ..., 0.51373936, 0.51515152,
       0.51515152]), array([0.51683502, 0.61829557, 0.51683502, ..., 0.51683502, 0.51683502,
       0.51683502]), array([0.49046016, 0.49046016, 0.57379464, ..., 0.53879285, 0.58809522,
       0.54393788]), array([0.50841751, 0.50841751, 0.50841751, ..., 0.50841751, 0.50436886,
       0.50841751])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.95 : [0.6608281217868851, 0.6556507498075067, 0.4111294625841697, 0.6523826479869357]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5027829257293606, 0.5009778369990828, 0.5896347112744621, 0.4991326064615404]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.95 : [0.9668342064278636, 0.9506645401382243, 0.28645280079314495, 0.9427587920082331]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5019571089916754, 0.5003730925642652, 0.7279762440385135, 0.49876088915590266]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5032597526839812, 0.5008503702653864, 0.589430606243135, 0.49844098784679164]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.95 : [array([0.661596  , 0.49940813, 0.49940813, ..., 0.49940813, 0.49940813,
       0.49940813], dtype=float32), array([0.48380703, 0.9575192 , 0.48380703, ..., 0.48380703, 0.48380703,
       0.48380703], dtype=float32), array([0.45913708, 0.45913708, 0.45913708, ..., 0.45913708, 0.45913708,
       0.7879859 ], dtype=float32), array([0.4775579, 0.4775579, 0.4775579, ..., 0.4775579, 0.4775579,
       0.4775579], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.95 : [0.13332899954495223, 0.24789054966248794, 0.2656526353024408, 0.29335260115606937]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.95 : [0.6650079365683449, 0.6797614174605557, 0.6627275879263896, 0.6642631277415334]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.95 : [0.8158313444709626, 0.8277319380156973, 0.7930306230200633, 0.7903753309453356]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.95 : [0.07259663032705649, 0.14577352472089314, 0.15954960696834503, 0.180098655026793]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5276193175778621, 0.5578428940934699, 0.5586578322644652, 0.5668426460688091]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.95 : [array([0.51139182, 0.39604264, 0.67277563, ..., 0.39604264, 0.39604264,
       0.39604264]), array([0.42482087, 0.64472618, 0.42482087, ..., 0.42482087, 0.42482087,
       0.42482087]), array([0.38489872, 0.38489872, 0.55105871, ..., 0.46983432, 0.66781159,
       0.56317867]), array([0.39772835, 0.39772835, 0.39772835, ..., 0.39772835, 0.39772835,
       0.39772835])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.95 : [0.2548139397519197, 0.32555032978042464, 0.3269182704323919, 0.3665927963047019]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5534004320964981, 0.5705486312439475, 0.5708601671026687, 0.579199042346111]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.95 : [0.7692582025677603, 0.757838818346722, 0.7578215527230591, 0.740241535475523]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.95 : [0.1526971541837746, 0.2073010809852915, 0.2084130019120459, 0.2436211363071791]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5529886971618893, 0.5706515962158523, 0.5706161641214612, 0.5797222123799738]
===Logistic Regression with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.025
Logistic F1-score 36.938619800573555
Logistic ROCAUC score: 57.557261670592865
Logistic Recall score: 24.85747671824652
Logistic Precision Score: 71.86732186732186
Logistic Confusion Matrix [[25457  2748]
 [21221  7020]]

Logistic Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.55      0.90      0.68     28205
           1       0.72      0.25      0.37     28241

    accuracy                           0.58     56446
   macro avg       0.63      0.58      0.52     56446
weighted avg       0.63      0.58      0.52     56446


Logistic Accuracy Score 57.536406476986855
Execution Time for Logistic Regression NearMiss:  0.3151223659515381 seconds
===DecisionTreeClassifier with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.025
DCT F1-score 32.33344381836261
DCT ROCAUC score: 56.622121844987305
DCT Recall score: 20.725186785170497
DCT Precision Score: 73.50244882581941
DCT Confusion Matrix [[26095  2110]
 [22388  5853]]

DCT Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.54      0.93      0.68     28205
           1       0.74      0.21      0.32     28241

    accuracy                           0.57     56446
   macro avg       0.64      0.57      0.50     56446
weighted avg       0.64      0.57      0.50     56446


DCT Accuracy Score 56.59922758034227
Execution Time for Decision Tree NearMiss:  0.2563652992248535 seconds
===Naive Bayes with TfidfVectorizer Imabalanced - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.025
Naive F1-score 44.0283203125
Naive ROCAUC score: 59.401711838002136
Naive Recall score: 31.92875606387876
Naive Precision Score: 70.89393820268889
Naive Confusion Matrix [[24503  3702]
 [19224  9017]]

Naive Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.56      0.87      0.68     28205
           1       0.71      0.32      0.44     28241

    accuracy                           0.59     56446
   macro avg       0.63      0.59      0.56     56446
weighted avg       0.63      0.59      0.56     56446


Naive Accuracy Score 59.38419019948269
Execution Time for Naive Bayes NearMiss:  0.06578969955444336 seconds
===XGB with TfidfVectorizer NearMiss - 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.025
XGB F1-Score 30.5245883085281
XGB ROCAUC Score: 64.83029759986793
XGB Recall score: 75.9611322348965
XGB Precision Score: 19.099890230515918
XGB Confusion Matrix [[26498 22847]
 [ 1707  5394]]

XGB Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.94      0.54      0.68     49345
           1       0.19      0.76      0.31      7101

    accuracy                           0.57     56446
   macro avg       0.57      0.65      0.49     56446
weighted avg       0.85      0.57      0.64     56446


XGB Accuracy Score 59.38419019948269
Execution Time for XGBoost Classifier NearMiss:  0.607327938079834 seconds
====RandomForest with Tfidf NearMiss 2010 Split 1 0.95 0.025
RFC F1 score 36.91720150639156
RFC ROCAUC Score: 57.88180782294838
RFC Recall score: 73.53407290015848
RFC Precision Score: 24.645019652278602
RFC Confusion Matrix [[25700  2505]
 [21281  6960]]

RFC Classification               precision    recall  f1-score   support

           0       0.55      0.91      0.68     28205
           1       0.74      0.25      0.37     28241

    accuracy                           0.58     56446
   macro avg       0.64      0.58      0.53     56446
weighted avg       0.64      0.58      0.53     56446


RFC Accuracy Score 57.860610140665415
Execution Time for Random Forest Classifier NearMiss:  106.32242059707642 seconds
Array of Prob Scores LR-Sam: 0.95 : [array([0.51900698, 0.49644018, 0.62059903, ..., 0.49644018, 0.49644018,
       0.49644018]), array([0.49725044, 0.54859563, 0.49725044, ..., 0.49725044, 0.49725044,
       0.49725044]), array([0.46756547, 0.46756547, 0.51680696, ..., 0.49088417, 0.55275699,
       0.51506911]), array([0.48291383, 0.48291383, 0.48291383, ..., 0.48291383, 0.48291383,
       0.48291383]), array([0.45065541, 0.45065541, 0.45065541, ..., 0.45065541, 0.45065541,
       0.36325488])]
Array of F1 Scores LR-Sam: 0.95 : [0.37407407407407406, 0.3909900033931042, 0.3412489483540044, 0.4094696199959358, 0.3693861980057355]
Array of ROCAUC Scores LR-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5811783647112148, 0.5865404588243797, 0.5702123946054467, 0.5876670767511888, 0.5755726167059286]
Array of Recall Scores LR-Sam: 0.95 : [0.2502477700693756, 0.2654616338826865, 0.2226117130514836, 0.28602860286028603, 0.2485747671824652]
Array of Precision Scores LR-Sam: 0.95 : [0.7404692082111437, 0.7417310358486829, 0.7306217315514236, 0.7203503440879435, 0.7186732186732187]
Array of Accuracy Scores LR-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5808383233532934, 0.5866314707862382, 0.5699783864224214, 0.5881373347978599, 0.5753640647698686]
Array of Prob Scores DT-Sam: 0.95 : [array([1.       , 0.3956044, 1.       , ..., 0.3956044, 0.3956044,
       0.3956044]), array([0.42287234, 1.        , 0.42287234, ..., 0.42287234, 0.42287234,
       0.42287234]), array([0.38543517, 0.38543517, 1.        , ..., 0.38543517, 0.66666667,
       0.38543517]), array([0.39869281, 0.39869281, 0.39869281, ..., 0.39869281, 0.39869281,
       0.39869281]), array([0.36075949, 0.36075949, 0.36075949, ..., 0.36075949, 0.36075949,
       0.        ])]
Array of F1 Scores DT-Sam: 0.95 : [0.1995595252661201, 0.2471385052201946, 0.26618495425674493, 0.2972904102607662, 0.3233344381836261]
Array of ROCAUC Scores DT-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5368394564546519, 0.5489243958099583, 0.554067750905567, 0.559723267200373, 0.566221218449873]
Array of Recall Scores DT-Sam: 0.95 : [0.11546085232903865, 0.14807726386673756, 0.161744918915091, 0.18630895347599277, 0.20725186785170496]
Array of Precision Scores DT-Sam: 0.95 : [0.7346846846846847, 0.7466047176554682, 0.7513157894736842, 0.7352941176470589, 0.7350244882581941]
Array of Accuracy Scores DT-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5364064769868547, 0.5490380186372816, 0.5538036353328846, 0.5603054246536513, 0.5659922758034227]
Array of Prob Scores NB-Sam: 0.95 : [array([0.55739602, 0.51515152, 0.71005438, ..., 0.51373936, 0.51515152,
       0.51515152]), array([0.51683502, 0.61829557, 0.51683502, ..., 0.51683502, 0.51683502,
       0.51683502]), array([0.49046016, 0.49046016, 0.57379464, ..., 0.53879285, 0.58809522,
       0.54393788]), array([0.50841751, 0.50841751, 0.50841751, ..., 0.50841751, 0.50436886,
       0.50841751]), array([0.48484848, 0.48484848, 0.48484848, ..., 0.48484848, 0.48484848,
       0.31586329])]
Array of F1 Scores NB-Sam: 0.95 : [0.6608281217868851, 0.6556507498075067, 0.4111294625841697, 0.6523826479869357, 0.440283203125]
Array of ROCAUC Scores NB-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5027829257293606, 0.5009778369990828, 0.5896347112744621, 0.4991326064615404, 0.5940171183800214]
Array of Recall Scores NB-Sam: 0.95 : [0.9668342064278636, 0.9506645401382243, 0.28645280079314495, 0.9427587920082331, 0.3192875606387876]
Array of Precision Scores NB-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5019571089916754, 0.5003730925642652, 0.7279762440385135, 0.49876088915590266, 0.7089393820268889]
Array of Accuracy Scores NB-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5032597526839812, 0.5008503702653864, 0.589430606243135, 0.49844098784679164, 0.5938419019948269]
Array of Prob Scores XG-Sam: 0.95 : [array([0.661596  , 0.49940813, 0.49940813, ..., 0.49940813, 0.49940813,
       0.49940813], dtype=float32), array([0.48380703, 0.9575192 , 0.48380703, ..., 0.48380703, 0.48380703,
       0.48380703], dtype=float32), array([0.45913708, 0.45913708, 0.45913708, ..., 0.45913708, 0.45913708,
       0.7879859 ], dtype=float32), array([0.4775579, 0.4775579, 0.4775579, ..., 0.4775579, 0.4775579,
       0.4775579], dtype=float32), array([0.43941852, 0.43941852, 0.43941852, ..., 0.43941852, 0.43941852,
       0.43941852], dtype=float32)]
Array of F1 Scores XG-Sam: 0.95 : [0.13332899954495223, 0.24789054966248794, 0.2656526353024408, 0.29335260115606937, 0.305245883085281]
Array of ROCAUC Scores XG-Sam: 0.95 : [0.6650079365683449, 0.6797614174605557, 0.6627275879263896, 0.6642631277415334, 0.6483029759986794]
Array of Recall Scores XG-Sam: 0.95 : [0.8158313444709626, 0.8277319380156973, 0.7930306230200633, 0.7903753309453356, 0.7596113223489649]
Array of Precision Scores XG-Sam: 0.95 : [0.07259663032705649, 0.14577352472089314, 0.15954960696834503, 0.180098655026793, 0.19099890230515917]
Array of Accuracy Scores XG-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5276193175778621, 0.5578428940934699, 0.5586578322644652, 0.5668426460688091, 0.5650001771604719]
Array of Prob Scores RF-Sam: 0.95 : [array([0.51139182, 0.39604264, 0.67277563, ..., 0.39604264, 0.39604264,
       0.39604264]), array([0.42482087, 0.64472618, 0.42482087, ..., 0.42482087, 0.42482087,
       0.42482087]), array([0.38489872, 0.38489872, 0.55105871, ..., 0.46983432, 0.66781159,
       0.56317867]), array([0.39772835, 0.39772835, 0.39772835, ..., 0.39772835, 0.39772835,
       0.39772835]), array([0.36137415, 0.36137415, 0.36137415, ..., 0.36137415, 0.36137415,
       0.1310989 ])]
Array of F1 Scores RF-Sam: 0.95 : [0.2548139397519197, 0.32555032978042464, 0.3269182704323919, 0.3665927963047019, 0.36917201506391556]
Array of ROCAUC Scores RF-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5534004320964981, 0.5705486312439475, 0.5708601671026687, 0.579199042346111, 0.5788180782294838]
Array of Recall Scores RF-Sam: 0.95 : [0.7692582025677603, 0.757838818346722, 0.7578215527230591, 0.740241535475523, 0.7353407290015848]
Array of Precision Scores RF-Sam: 0.95 : [0.1526971541837746, 0.2073010809852915, 0.2084130019120459, 0.2436211363071791, 0.24645019652278602]
Array of Accuracy Scores RF-Sam: 0.95 : [0.5529886971618893, 0.5706515962158523, 0.5706161641214612, 0.5797222123799738, 0.5786061014066541]
Array x-axis 1 [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
Array x-axis 2 [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
Array x-axis 3 [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
Array x-axis 4 [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
Array x-axis 5 [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
Array x-axis 6 [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
Array x-axis 7 [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
Array x-axis 8 [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
Array x-axis 9 [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
Array x-axis 10 [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
