pubs.acs.org/jacsau
JACS Au at Pacifichem 2021
Cite This: JACS Au 2021, 1, 2088-2088

Read Online

Editorial

ACCESS

Metrics & More

Article Recommendations

T he International Chemical Congress of Pacific Basin Societies, typically abbreviated as Pacifichem, is one of
the largest conferences focusing on chemistry, typically
occurring every 5 years in the most central location of the Pacific region, Hawaii. Founded in 1984, Pacifichem 2021
(which begins today) will be the eighth in the series, and is
cosponsored by American Chemical Society, Canadian Society
for Chemistry, Chemical Society of Japan, Chinese Chemical
Society, Korean Chemical Society, New Zealand Institute of
Chemistry, and Royal Australian Chemical Institute. The Chemical Society of Japan hosts the 2021 Congress.1
The goal of Pacifichem is to foster collaborations among Pacific basin chemical scientists with the aim of building partnerships within the region with the hope of finding solutions
to global problems. The current conference was originally
scheduled to be held in 2020, but it was delayed to 2021 due to
the COVID-19 pandemic. With the continued uncertainty
relating to the pandemic coupled with marginal improvements
in many parts of the world, the board of directors made the difficult decision to turn the overall conference into a virtual
forum, with no in-person components. This means that, instead
of enjoying the tropical sunshine in between technical sessions,
conference attendees will meet virtually from various time zones. To this end, the organizers of each section made the effort to
reorganize the talks considering the time zones of the speakers
participating from all over the world. The main theme of Pacifichem 2021 is A Creative Vision for the
Future, with two subthemes of Core Chemistry and Chemistry for Global Challenges. Pacifichem 2021 will provide the platform for the disclosure and discussion of thousands of new findings in chemistry and related fields, providing new vistas addressing important problems facing humanity. Core Chemistry will
include Analytical, Organic, Inorganic, Physical, Computational
and Theoretical, Macromolecular and Biological, Materials
Science, Nanotechnology, Chemical Education and Communi-
cation, and Chemical/Biological/Biomedical Engineering sessions. Chemistry for Global Challenges will include Chemistry for
Sustainability, Chemistry for Energy, Chemistry for Health Care, and Artificial Intelligence, Big Data, and Beyond. Because
the conference emphasizes the collaborative nature of chemistry
as a multidisciplinary science, this year, more than ever, its
central role in tackling major global challenges comes to the fore.
We originally planned to meet as many community members as possible in Honolulu, introducing JACS Au to the Pacifichem
community. As the COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve,
we look forward to a future opportunity to meet in-person and discuss the role of JACS Au and open access publications in the
global chemistry publishing landscape. As a fully open access journal, the goal of JACS Au is to provide a highly selective venue

that covers the full breadth of chemistry-related topics. As we seek to become a leading open access journal, close communication with potential authors, readers, and reviewers is very important and conferences like Pacifichem provide an excellent opportunity to build such personal connections.
Several members of the JACS Au editorial team are involved in Pacifichem 2021. Prof. Christopher Jones is co-organizing a session of "Porous Materials: Synthesis, Characterization, and Utilization", Prof. Xin Xu is co-organizing a session on "Triangle of Heterogeneous Catalysis, Surface Science, and Theory", and Prof. Hyunjoo Lee will present talks in three different sessions: "Supported Single-Ion Catalysts", "New Directions in Homo/ Heterogeneous Catalysis of Hydrogen Production and CO2 Utilization", and "Design of Single-Site and Nano-Confined Catalysts for Environmental and Energy Uses".
If you will be attending the conference this year, please drop by one of our sessions virtually or reach out to us via other means. We will be very happy to discuss our research and answer any questions about JACS Au or open access publishing.
Christopher W. Jones, Editor-in-Chief orcid.org/00000003-3255-5791
Hyunjoo Lee, Associate Editor orcid.org/0000-0002-45389086
Xin Xu, Associate Editor orcid.org/0000-0002-5247-2937
 Wasiu Lawal, Assistant Managing Editor AUTHOR INFORMATION
Complete contact information is available at: https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/jacsau.1c00539
Notes Views expressed in this editorial are those of the authors and not
necessarily the views of the ACS. REFERENCES
(1) https://pacifichem.org/.
Published: December 16, 2021

Published 2021 by American Chemical Society

2088

https://doi.org/10.1021/jacsau.1c00539 JACS Au 2021, 1, 2088-2088

