v.- EXCISION OF TUMOURS.

1. Excision op Tumour on Jaw.

(Under the care of Dr. Andrew Buchanan. Reported by Dr.

Robert B. Gilland.)?C. B., aged 53, admitted into the Glasgow

Royal Infirmary on the 29th of May. Three years ago a small,

round, hard lump, appeared in patient's upper lip. It has grown

slowly, but steadily. On admission, there is an indurated dif-

No. 30.?Vol. VIII.

2 E

218

Clinical Record.

fused swelling situated beneath the nose. The tumour is connected with the upper lip, and extends downwards in front of the incisors of the upper jaw. It is af times the seat of very acute pain. Two small indurated glands are felt on the left side, beneath the lower jaw.
June 4th?Suitable incisions being made on the upper lip, tne
tumour was easily dissected out. It was of a cbondsromatous structure, and sprung from the lower edge of the septum narium, where it was attached to cartilage and to bone.
18?A?Doing well.

2. Excision of Tumour on Cheek.

(Under the care of Dr. Eben Watson. Reported by T. H. Steel, M.D.)?A. M'D. was admitted a patient in ward 5 of the Glasgow Royal Infirmary on the 21st May, 1860. In January last, a small red spot formed over middle of left molar bone. Over it a round hard swelling appeared, and gradually increased in
size. About two months ago, when about the size of a hen's egg,
the skin ulcerated, and a fungoid excrescence protruded, from which haemorrhage, to a considerable extent, has repeatedly taken place. At present it is about the same dimensions, hard and painless on pressure, and nodulated on the surface j it moves on the cheek, has a narrow neck, and bleeds on being touched.
23rd?A ligature was passed round the neck of the swelling, by which it was strangulated. It was then shaved off with a knife. No bleeding took place. To have twenty drops of laudanum.
June 3rd?Continued to improve till this morning, when side of cheek and face was observed to be red and painful. Has been very sick, and complains of giddiness.
To have half an ounce of castor oil. To have thirty drops of
tincture of muriate of iron every fourth hour.
9th?Feels much better. Erysipelas gone. Wound nearly
healed. 16th?.Dismissed well.

3. Excision op Tumotjb of Lip.
(Under the care of. Dr. Andrew Buchanan. Reported by Dr. Robert B. Gilland.)?L. M'K. was admitted into the Glasgow Royal Infirmary on the 21st of March. Six months ago, a small fissure on patient's lower lip first attracted his attention. He applied several ointments and lotions to it, which proved ineffectual, the disease extending, and involving more than half of the lip.
On'admission, the lower lip is swollen and indurated; thepro-
labium is dry, cracked, and ulcerated, the whole assuming the appearance of epithelial cancer.

Excision of Tumours.

219

25th?The affected portion of the lower lip was removed by a semi-elliptical incision, and then, by means of proper incisions, two flaps were taken from the side of the chin, and being brought up and secured by metallic sutures, formed a very respectable lower lip. There was a considerable ar ant of swelling afterwards, which, however, gradually subsided, and patient was dismissed curec. on the 28th of April.

4. Excision of Fatty Tumour of Shoulder.
Case I.?(Under the care of Dr. Andrew Buchanan. Reported by Dr. Robert B. Gilland.)?D. L., aged 57, was admitted into the Glasgow Royal Infirmary on the 29th May. Twelve years ago patient first observed a soft tumour, about as large as an egg, below his left shoulder. It has increased in size gradually till within the last twelvemonth, when its growth has been more rapid.
On admission, a soft moveable tumour, in size and shape resembling a female mamma, is situated upon patient's left side, between the base of the scapula and the axilla. It is generally free from pain, unless when subjected to pressure. I June 2nd?Tumour excised, and presented the usual appearances 01 a lipomatous growth.
14th?Dismissed well.
Case 11.?(U nder the care of Dr. Ehen W atson. Reported by Dr. William Sloan.)?Mrs. S., domestic, aged 41, was admitted into ward 6 of the Glasgow Royal Infirmary on 5th June, 1860. '?Eleven years ago, patient noticed a small tumour at the inferior angle of right scapula. It was then about the size of a pigeon's egg, and it has steadily continued to increase in size ever since, until it is now as large as a person's head. She has never experienced the slightest pain in it, and it does not inconvenience her much. Her general health has always been good.
On admission, the whole of the right scapular region is found to be occupied by a large tumour, having a rounded globular form. It has a lobulated feel, and is unconnected with any of the deeperseated structures. The integuments covering it are smooth and healthy on the surface, and are likewise found to glide over the surface of the tumour, without having any connection with it.
7th?She was submitted to a consultation this morning, when
excision was recommended.
9th?Patient was removed to the operating theatre this morning, and put under chloroform. Two longitudinal incisions were made down the whole length of the tumour, thereby leaving an oval portion of skin adherent along the central axis of the surface of the tumour. The flaps thus indicated were then reflected, and the tumour being found to be encased in a fibro-cellular sheathr was easily dissected out, without cutting or.tearing a single mus-

220

Clinical Record.

cular fibre beneath it. Not more than an ounce of blood was lost.

This chiefly came from some arterial branches which entered the tumour at its upper part, and which were easily tied. The flaps, which were found to be of the requisite size, were then brought together by means of wire sutures, and the surface from which the tumour was excised was thus exactly covered over. The patient stood the operation very well.
Habeat statim tr. opii gtts. xxv., et repetatur post horas duas. 10<A?Wound dressed this morning, and looking well. 11 th?Flaps are found to have become erysipelatous. Habeat tr. fer. sesquichlorid. gtts. xxx. quarts quaque hor&. Habeat etiam haustus nigr. ?iij. f ? 12th?Erysipelas has been rapidly spreading, and now covers the whole of posterior portion of right side of chest. Wire sutures withdrawn. Wound discharges healthy pus. 13th?Nearly the whole of the back part of chest is now covered over with erysipelas. Wound still doing well. General health

good.

. K.r ii j)

-J l6M?Erysipelas has now in a great measure subsided. Edges

of wound, which is still looking well, approximated by means of

strips of adhesive plaster.

23rd?Erysipelas completely gone. Flaps are now adherent,

and the wound is cicatrizing.

After the tumour was removed, it was found to weigh 3 lbs.

12 02. It was a simple fatty tumour, and had a lobulated struc-

ture. A small round, hard, gritty nucleus, about the size of a

walnut, was found in it at its upper part. This, when examined

by the microscope, displayed an interlacement of fibrous structure,

having interposed in its meshes a number of nucleated cells.

The other portions displayed the usual appearance of a fatty

tumour.

5. Excision op Mahma.

Case III. (Under the care of Dr. Andrew Buchanan. Reported by Dr. Robert B. Gilland.)?Mrs. M., aged 45, was admitted into ward 8 of the Glasgow Royal Infirmary on the 3rd of April, 1860. Nine months ago patient first observed a small hard tumour in her left breast. It has gradually increased in size up to the pre-
sent date.
On admission, an indurated moveable tumour, about as large as the woman's closed fist, is situated in her left mamma. The general contour of the tumour is equal and rounded, but small hard prominences may be felt upon its surface. It is the seat of occasional acute pain. Close to the anterior border of the left pectoralis major muscle, another small tumour of the same character exists. It is about as large as a marble. Patient's general health good. Menstruation regular.

Excision of Tumours.

221

11th?Tumour excised to-day, and found to be decidedly can-
cerous in structure and appearance.
Hab. vin. rubri ?viii., et pil. op. (gr. ii.) i. The wound healed slowly, and she was dismissed well on the 16th of April. oi Case IV.?(Under the care of Dr. Andrew Buchanan. Reported by Dr. Robert B. Gilland.)?A. A., aged 40, admitted into ward 8 of the Glasgow Royal Infirmary on the 29th of May, 1860. About a twelvemonth ago patient first observed a small hard tumour, the size of a pea, on her left breast. It has steadily increased in size, and is now occasionally painful. On examination, an indurated moveable tumour is situated below the anterior border of left pectoralis major muscle. It is as large as an egg, and irregular on the surface. Several small glands in the axilla appear to be affected. Patient, who is stout and healthy, menstruates regularly. June 11.th?Tumour excised, and presents the usual malignant
characteristics.
12th?Secondary haemorrhage supervened, which was staunched by moderate pressure.
19th?Doing well.

6. Excision op Hemorrhoids.

(Under the care of Dr. Eben Watson. Reported by T. H.

Steel, M.D.)?M. C. was admitted a patient in ward 5 of the

Glasgow Royal Infirmary on the 22nd of May, 1860. For six

months has been annoyed with piles, whose origin he ascribes to

long continued constipation of the bowels. Their presence cause

him muck annoyance from pain and straining in passing evacua-

tions, which are frequently bloody; the swollen membrane

becomes prolapsed, and much difficulty is often experienced in

returning it.

?

On examination, several red pendulous tumours are visible

external to sphincter, and internally several of much larger size

are brought to view on pressing down.

29tk?The bowels having been previously regulated, the exter-

nal piles were to-day snipped off with a pair of scissors. The

internal, after having been made to protrude, were seized singly

by a volsella, and a strong ligature passed round the base of

each, i The ends were cut short, and returned into the rectum.

No chloroform was employed.

To have forty drops of laudanum, and a fomentation to part.

Draught to be repeated at bed-time.

t: 30tf/i?Passed a comfortable night; complains now of much

pain, and feels inclination to go to stool. Opiates to be continued.

31st?Has had a copious alvine evacuation this morning with-

out medicine. Has passed only a small quantity of blood.

222

Clinical Record.

June 10th?Defecation is now no longer attended with pain and discomfort. Discharged well.

