SMITH'S OPERATION,

To the Editor of " The Indian Medical Gazette."

Sir,?In the present unsettled state of opinion, it seems the duty of every mail, who has made a fair trial of Smith's operation for cataract, to give his opinion thereon. After an experience of about five hundred operations on the old lines, I tried extraction in the capsule from Colonel Smith's description, and was well satisfied with the result in comparison with the old operation. As I had an unduly large escape of vitreous, I visited Amritsar and was kindly shown by Lieutenant-Colonel Smith the exact technique. I have done over fifteen hundred operations 011 his lines and am very much pleased with the result. My percentage of vitreous escape is about eight per cent.; and I can say that a moderate loss does not seem to effect the subsequent vision. The great and chief advantage is the practical abolition of iritis. A large proportion of my cases were operated on in Branch Dispensaries, and the cases left to the care of SubAssistant Surgeons. I would never have dared to have performed the old operation under those circumstances owing to the great amount of care needed in the after-treatment. Practically the only complication is a somewhat increased tendency to prolapse of the iris ; but with increased experience in the art of properly replacing it, which has been erroneously called "stirring up the vitreous," the incidence of this complication has much diminished ; I learn, by hearsay that a number of men, doing what they call Smith's operation have a 40 or 50 per cent, escape of vitreous. Although a moderate vitreous loss is not a disaster, as it was deemed

in the old days, it is undesirable mainly because it causes

increased change of iris prolapse, and I would strongly

advice any man with a large percentage of vitreous loss to

\JSit Colonel Smith who, I am sure, would be glad to show

Xim the best way of doing the operation. In conclusion,

I would like to thanjc him warmly for his valuable aid and

advice.

/

Yours truly,

11. G. TURNER, f.k.c.s., Lt.-Col.,
Civil Surgeon, Naini Tal.

