^CULTURAL EXAMINATION OF THE
URINE IN KALA-AZAR.
"
By L. EVERARD NAPIER, m.r.c.s., l.r.c.p.,
and
B. M. DAS GUPTA, Sub-Assistant Surgeon.
From :?The Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine.
Our excuse for publishing this note is the fact that the success of Shortt (1923) in obtaining a pure culture of the herpetomonad
form of L,. donovani from the urine of a kala-
azar patient has led to certain statements on the possibilities of the urine being the transmitting medium of the infection of kala-azar, which are obviously absurd and which were certainly not suggested by Shortt himself.
Both writers have been interested in the
possibilities of urine being the transmitting
medium of the infection of kala-azar and with
this possibility in view made an effort last year to obtain cultures of the herpetomonad form of L. donovani from the urine of patients suffering from this disease. In conjunction with Knowles (1923) we attempted to obtain
cultures from the urine of six untreated kala-
azar patients without success. The findings of Shortt encouraged us to make another attempt. At first we took catheter specimens of urine, but we subsequently found that by carefully washing the meatus with perchloride of mercury followed by distilled water, a sterile specimen could be obtained with rather more certainty and with considerably less trouble to us and discomfort to the patient. The first few ounces of the flow of urine were discarded and then about 25 c.c.
taken into a sterile test tube. This was allow-
ed to stand for a couple of hours before a drop or two was pipetted from the bottom of the tube, including the deposit if there were any,
into 3 or 4 N.N.N, tubes which were then incubated at 22?C.

Nov., 1923.1 EXAMN. OF URINE IN KALA-AZAR : NAPIER & DAS GUPTA. 531

Sixteen specimens of urine were taken from 16 different untreated male kala-azar patients in whom the diagnosis had been made (in every case) by the demonstration of the presence of the parasite. In no case was a culture of herpctomonad forms of L. donovani obtained from
the urine. The results that we obtained were as follows:?
All the tubes became contaminated prior to the first examination in 6 cases.
At least one of the tubes remained sterile
for 9 to 12 days, subsequently becoming con-
taminated in 4 cases. Two or more of the tubes remained sterile
for a month or more in 6 cases.
We then repeated this experiment with two
more cases, but in each of these two cases we took two sterile test tubes of urine and to one
tube added two drops of blood taken from the vein of the patient at the same time. T\vo drops of blood from each patient were also placed in tubes of citrate saline, so that there
were three tubes from each of these two
patients. The deposit from each of these three
tubes was inoculated into each of three tubes of
N.N.N, medium.
The following results were obtained:?

1st case.

2nd case-

Urine only

Sterile, no flagellate?.

Contaminated

Uri ne blood

plus

A rich culture of -flagellates.

Blood in citrate .

saline :?

A ric" culture of

flagellates.

ft

The examination was made after 9 days in-
cubation.

Conclusion.
Our previous failure in 6 cases, our present failure in 11 cases, in which the flagellates had a reasonable chance of development, and Shortt's* negative results make it clear that as a general rule a viable form of the parasite is not present in the urine of a kala-azar patient.
Under special circumstances the parasites may be present, but they are present only in the cellular deposit that has found its way into the urine on account of some pathological condition of the urinary tract. One example of such a condition can be imitated by the addi tion of a few drops of peripheral blood to the urine in vitro. The fact that the parasite is
recoverable from the urine when this has been done shows that urine does not destroy the parasites and further that the accident of an abrasion to the mucous membrane of the blad-
der or other part of. the urinary tract, by scratching by oxalate crystals or through some

*We assume that he did not make an isolated
?experiment.

other cause, could allow the escape of a viable
form of the parasite into the urine.
We do not think that this accident can
possibly have any connection whatsoever with the epidemiology of the disease.
The atypical type of the disease referred to by Shortt, in which the liver and spleen are not enlarged is by no means uncommon and forms from 1 to 2 per cent, of the general kalaazar outpatient attendance at the Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine, but it is probable that
the condition is much commoner than these
figures suggest. The lay public and even the medical profession associate kala-azar with a condition of enlargement of the spleen and liver, and it is natural that when these conditions are absent kala-azar is not suspected and consequently the patients do not come for treat-
ment for this disease.
There are advanced cases of kala-azar with
very large spleens, others with slightly enlarged spleens, yet others with no apparent enlargement of the spleen but enlargement of the liver and finally cases without either apparent enlargement of the spleen or liver. As these conditions of enlargement or otherwise of the spleen and liver are not associated with any other special signs and symptoms except those that are directly dependent on the enlargement of these two organs, and as all the intermediate stages of these conditions are seen, one does not seem justified in classifying them into four distinct types and certainly not in suggesting that there can be any distinction in the etiology of these types.
It is of course possible that in cases where the liver and spleen are unaffected by the disease, the kidneys bear the brunt of the attack and there is consequently not only more cellular deposit in the urine but this deposit is more highly infected with leishmania.
The discrepancy between our findings and those of Shortt can probably be accounted for by the fact that he centrifuged the urine, a procedure which we, working in the plains in the hot weather, find impossible in the interests of sterility, and thereby obtained a deposit rich in cellular elements. If this explanation is accepted our contention is further emphasised.
Our thanks are due to Major R. Knowles, t.m.s., Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine, for permitting the junior writer to co-operate in this small investigation.

References.

Shortt, H. E.?"The Recovery of Rerpetomonas donovani from the Urine of a Kala-azar Patient." In-

dian Jl. of Medical Research. 1923. pp. 319-20.

Vol. XI.

No. 1., July

Knowles, R., Napier, L,. E., and Das Gupta, B. M.? "The Kala-azar Transmission Problem." Indian Medical Gazette. Vol. 58. No. 7., July 1923.

