COMPLEMENT-FIXATION TEST WITH WITEBSKY, KLINGENSTEIN, KUHN (WKK) OR SIMILAR ANTIGENS : AMODIFIED TECHNIQUE
By P. C. SEN GUPTA, m.b. (Cal.) Officer-in-chargc, Kala-azar Research Department,
Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine A technique of a complement-fixation test for kala-azar with WKK antigen was described by Greval, Sen Gupta and Napier in 1939. The value of this test in the diagnosis of kalaazar has been assessed in the subsequent publications by the writer (Sen Gupta, 1943, 1944). In the course of his investigations on the complement-fixation test for kala-azar using antigens prepared from the so-called leprosy
bacilli of Kedrowsky and of Lleras, according to the WKK method, during the last two years,
the writer has felt that certain alterations in

the technique were advisable in order to obtain the best results with these antigens.
In the technique described by Greval, Sen Gupta and Napier, the maximum amount 01 antigen not interfering with 1 MHD of complement was determined by titration and this
was used in the test proper.
One volume of each of the gradually increasing dilutions, 1 : 10, 1 : 20, 1 : 30, etc., was titrated f?r anticomplementary activity by mixing with 1 MHD of complement in a volume and one volume of normal saline, and after proper incubation the presence of f?ee complement was detected by adding one volume of sensitized cells and incubating for half an hour.
In the course of investigations it was found that the anticomplementary titre of the antigen was markedly different if instead of one volume
of saline one volume of 1 : 25 dilution of a known
inactivated non-anticomplementary negative serum was used during the titration of the antigen. The titre was very much lower when the titration was carried out in the presence of 1]25 dilution of the serum in the amount that is present during the test proper. Also the titre was higher in the presence of volume of serum in 1/100 dilution, and highest in the absence of any serum. The amount of antigen and complement free to react was different in the two dilutions of serum used in the test proper, and some slight irregularity was seen
in some of the results obtained. It was therefore decided to titrate the anti-
gen for anticomplementary titre in the presence of 1/25 dilution of a ' negative' serum, to use only 1/25 dilution of the serum in the test proper (this ensures ' specificity' for kalaazar), and to modify the method of titration of the complement. To bring out the differences in the degrees of complement fixation it was decided to use the standard method of using two strengths of complement as in the Wassermann test. The sensitized sheep-cell suspension was prepared in accordance with the requirements of Wassermann test, method no4 of Medical Research Committee (1918) with the exception that the sheep-cell suspension was standardized according to a method described by Greval et al. (1930).
The technique that has thus been evolved has been tried in a large series of cases and has been found to be quite satisfactory. A brief description of the technique is given
below :?
1. Titration of the antigen.?0.1 c.c. of the benzolic solution of the antigen is taken up with a 1 c.c. pipette and spread on a glass mortar and allowed to dry completely. 0.2 c.c. of normal saline is then added to the residue in the mortar and a suspension is made by trituration. This forms the starting point for making the dilutions 1/10, 1/20 upwards.
In a series of test tubes labelled to show the dilutions; 1/20, 1/30, 1/40, etc., up to 1/90, put 0.25 c.c. of the
corresponding antigen dilution, 0.25 c.c. of 1/25 dilution of an inactivated negative serum, and 0.25 c.c. of complement dilution containing 1 MHD. Mix by gently shaking the tubes. Keep at room temperature for half an hour, then at 37?C. for half an hourAdd 0.25 c.c. of sensitized cells to each tube, mix?

I

Aug., 1945J A MODIFIED COMPLEMENT-FIXATION TEST : SEN GUPTA

397

incubate at 37?C. for half an hour; read for haemolysis. The strongest dilution of the antigen permitting a complete haemolysis corresponds to the anticomplementary activity short of 1 MHD of complement, and this is the dilution of the antigen to be used in the test
Proper. This dilution is then tested for haemolytic activity
by incubating 0.75 c.c. of this dilution with 025 c.c. ?f sensitized cell suspension. The antigen is usually found to be non-hsemolytic.
The power of fixation of the antigen is tested by putting up comparative tests with a series of known' sera using a known antigen and the new antigen.
Supposing that 1/G0 is the working dilution arrived at by titration, in order to make up the dilution needed
for the test proper, a total of 12 c.c. of saline will be required for the residue left after evaporation of 0-1 c.c. of the benzolic solution.
The titration of the antigen is not repeated daily, but the method of titration of the complement and the putting up of an antigen control during the test Proper, serves to check the correctness of the antigen titre.
2. Titration oj the complement.?1 : 10 dilution of the complement in normal saline is first prepared. From this 1/20, 1/30, 1/40, 1/50, . . . 1/120 dilutions are made. Two rows of tubes are set up on a rack to correspond to these dilutions of the complement. Two tubes, one behind the other, correspond to each dilution. In the tubes of the first row are placed 0.25 c.c. of the corresponding complement dilution and 0.5 c.c. of normal saline. In the tubes of the back row are put 0-25 c.c. each of the corresponding complement dilution, V25 dilution of inactivated negative serum, and the forking dilution of the antigen. The tubes are kept at room temperature for half an hour, then incubated at 37?C. for half an hour. Then 0.25 c.c. of sensitized
sheep cells is added to each tube and these are
'ncubated at 37?C. for half an hour, after which the fninimum haemolytic dose (MHD) of the complement 13 read. This is taken as the highest dilution at which there is complete lysis of the sheep cells. The tubes in the two rows usually show a similar degree of lysis. If there is a disagreement in the titre as indicated in the
two-rows, this is usually due to the defect in the antigen dilution, and can be rectified by again titrating the
antigen against 1 MHD of complement in the presence of 1/25 dilution of a negative serum, and using the antigen in the new working dilution thus obtained.
3. The test -proper.?The serum to be tested is ?nactivated to destroj^ the complement by heating to ?5?C. for half an hour in a water bath. 1 : 25 dilution ls prepared by mixing 0.1 c.c. of serum with 2.4 c.c. of normal saline.
The antigen dilution is made up as described previously {vide supra).-
Two strengths of complement dilution are made so as to contain 2 MHD and 5 MHD in a volume. Suppose 1 : 80 is the titre (MHD) of the complement, a 1 : 40 solution of the complement will contain 2 MHD and a 1 : 16 solution 5 MHD in a volume.
Three tubes, placed one behind the other, are required lor testing each serum; the first tube is for serum control with 2 MHD of complement, the second and the third for the test with the antigen and 2 and 0 MHD of complement respectively.

An ensemble

Tube Tube Tube ..Mix, then in

1. Serum 1/25 dilution 0.25 c.c. + normal saline 0.25 c.c. -f- 2 MHD complement in 0.25 c.c.
2. Serum 1/25 dilution 0.25 c.c. + antigen dilution 0.25 c.c. -f- 2 MHD complement in
0.25 c.c.
3. Serum 1/25 dilution 0.25 c.c. -f- antigen dilution 0.25 c.c. + 5 MHD complement in
0.25 c.c.
leave at room temperature for half an hour, an incubator at 37?C. for half an hour.

Add sensitized sheep cells 0.25 c.c. to each tube, mix; incubate at 37?C. for half an hour. Read for haemolysis.
The following general controls are put up along with the test proper
1. Antigen control : 0.25 c.c. of each of the following : antigen dilution, 1/25 dilution of negative serum, 1 MHD of complement.
2. Negative serum control : same as 1 but 2 MHD of complement is used.
3. Positive serum control : a known positive serum put up as in the test proper.
4. Cell suspension control : 0.25 c.c. of cell suspension put up with 0.75 c.c. of normal
saline.

The method of recording the results of the test The degree in inhibition of hemolysis in the
different tubes is read as follows :?

Complete inhibition of lysis = + positive.

A trace of lysis

=

More than a trace of lysis

T I doubtfuI. ? J

Almost complete lysis

= ?

/ neSatlve'

Complete lysis

=

- f

A trace of lysis is detected by leaving the tube in a refrigerator overnight to allow the
cells to settle down to the bottom of the tube.

The control tubes 1 and 2 should show com-

plete lysis ; the positive serum control should

show no lysis with 2 and 5 MHD complement ;

the cell suspension tube should show no lysis.

Any serum that shows any inhibition of lysis

in the serum control tube is to be regarded as

anticomplementary ; the other tubes are of no

value; no opinion as to fixation of the comple-

ment by this serum in the presence of antigen

can be given.

With complete lysis in the serum control

tube, complete inhibition of lysis with 2 MHD

of complement along with complete or almost

complete inhibition (?T) with 5 MHD is

reported

as

'
strongly

positive';

complete

inhi-

bition of lysis with 2 MHD, with partial or no

inhibition with 5 MHD, is reported as

'positive'; a trace of lysis or partial lysis with

2 MHD, with partial or no inhibition with 5

MHD, is reported as 'doubtful'; and complete

or almost complete lysis with 2 MHD comple-

ment as ' negative'.

Significance
As pointed out in the previous publications on the subject of complcment-fixation test for kala-azar by the writer, in the absence of severe (lepromatous) leprosy and post-kala-azar dermal leishmaniasis, a positive or strongly posi-
tive reaction with this test is indicative of
kala-azar. It should be borne in mind, however, that a very small proportion of clinically obvious cases of chronic pulmonary tuberculosis gives a positive reaction. This is not a serious drawback. The doubtful reaction is regarded
as an indication for further clinical and para-
sitological investigation. A negative reaction almost rules out kala-azar except in some very

398

THE INDIAN MEDICAL GAZETTE

early cases. A negative reaction is obtained in only about 1 per cent of all untreated cases of
kala-azar seen in Calcutta.
The advantages of this technique This technique has the advantage that the antigen and the complement are titrated under
the exact conditions that exist in the test proper. The titrations are carried out in such
a way that there are exactly 2 and 5 MHD of complement free to react. The adoption of the serum dilution of 1 : 25 ensures ' specificity ' of the test for kala-azar as in the previous technique described by Greval, the writer and Napier. The use of two strengths of the complement in differentiating the degrees of posi-
tive reaction is in line with the standard Bri-
tish methods of the Wassermann test. Also, this technique is much less time-consuming than the previously described method, because only
one dilution of the serum has to be made. The
amount of complement required is somewhat
more.
The writer is thankful to Dr. Dharmendra, officer-incharge of the Leprosy Research Department, and to Mr. R. Bose, the chemist of the same department, for kindly preparing for him several batches of the antigens from the different acid-fast bacilli.

REFERENCES

Greval, S. D. S., Sen Gupta, P. C., and Napier, L. E. (1939).
Greval, S. D. S., Yesudian, G., and Chowdhury, S. K. (1930).
Medical Research Com-
mittee (1918).

Sen Gupta, P. C. (1943).

Idem,

(1944).

Ind. J. Med. Res., 2.7, 181.

Ibid.,

17, 1161.

The Wassermann Test.

Special Report Ser. No. 14. His Majesty's Stationery

Office, London., Indian Med. Gaz., 78, 336.

Ibid.,

79, 465.

[Aug., 1945

