In response
I am sure many, perhaps most, readers of the Journal will have enjoyed Stuart Horner's article in this issue of the Journal Manager-bashing is fun (another good way to annoy us is to call us 'administrators').
I have sympathy with Dr Horner's frustration at managers who take arbitrary decisions. Continual overstatement of his case, however, weakens its effect. The most bizarre example is the suggestion that 'Doctors admitting emergencies to their hospitals aren't really trying if their patients have not achieved between five and nine episodes within 24 hours of

152

Journal of the Royal College of Physicians of London Vol. 31 No. 2 March/April 1997

The management myth

admission'. My authority keeps a close eye on the admissions/episodes ratio, and was the first to publish evidence of abuse; but for most of our trusts the ratio
is about 1:1.07 that is 7 extra episodes per 100 admissions. Perhaps my local hospital doctors aren't
really trying? Dr Horner presents what he describes as a series of
myths, moving readily between those believed by NHS managers and those by managers in other sectors. His basic proposition is that the NHS is different in kind, and that supermarket management will not work in the complex relationship between clinicians and patients. I agree, and argued the same point with an
MP on the Public Accounts Committee who wanted to
know why NHS operations were any different from a car's trip to the garage. His secondary proposition is that there are flaws in the managerial ethos, wherever it is practised in this country (in sharp distinction, it Would seem, from the tiger economies of the Pacific Rim, which had the good sense to model themselves on the 1974 NHS consensus model).
The problem with Dr Horner's analysis, apart from its partiality, is its narrow concept of managers. Apart from distinguishing theory Y from theory X managers, (the former, among whom I count myself, are apparently like red squirrels being overrun by grey) Dr Horner generalises excessively. In reality, managers, whether in the NHS or elsewhere, are no more
homogenous entities from the production lines of Henley, Ashridge or the London Business School than
patients are like Ford cars. For that matter, NHS con-
sultants and GPs, notwithstanding the efforts of their professional bodies, display individuality on a scale which any NHS manager ignores at peril. And for all their diversity, the most successful clinicians and managers are those who understand the need to work together - not in the outmoded 1974 consensus model, but in true collaboration based on respect.
In my view Dr Horner only partly addresses three key issues. First, resources, whether of money or personnel, are finite, and there will always need to be a managerial process to match finite supply with demand, just as there will always need to be a process whereby society determines what share of the common Wealth to allocate to health. Secondly, many of the drivers for change in health care are coming not from managers but from clinicians; the Audit Commission did not invent the proposition that the number of A&E Departments be reduced, but endorsed a clinical opinion on minimum size. Lastly, he fails to draw out the extent to which the much-derided analogy with
Sainsburys may have become a reality. A vast amount
of information about the NHS, much of which is
meaningful, is now available at the centre sufficiently quickly for 'headquarters' managers to know what is going on and to intervene in ways which may well reduce the responsibility of local management. The NHS's bankers, the Treasury, also have these data, and that opportunity.

Clinicians and managers at local level face an
increasing need to agree about the best ways of using public resources. If we do not, others will presume to
instruct us all. JOHN JAMES ChiefExecutive
Kensington & Chelsea and Westminster Health Authority
It is an interesting new myth that post-1974 consensus
management in the NHS has similarities with
the paternalistic, collaborative but fundamentally authoritarian corporate cultures of Japan, Korea and the Chinese diaspora. Consensus management is, in fact, a uniquely British eccentricity. Its theoretical
foundation derived from the work of Wilfred Brown
and Elliot Jacques in an unusual alliance with McKinsey 8c Co. Wilfred Brown was an exponent of industrial democracy with a powerful mix of philanthropy in the very British tradition of Owen, Rowntree and the John Lewis Partnership. His long time collaborator Elliot Jacques was a psychoanalyst who developed a very elaborate theoretical structure to describe social relationships at work. Wilfred Brown's Glacier Metal Company did not survive the terrible economic onslaught of the 1980s, and neither did NHS consensus management.
Developments in management of the health services in the 1980s and 1990s have, to a large extent, simply been of a piece with developments in society more widely.
Government in the 1980s asserted its political will over public services generally, including professional
services such as health and education. Administrators or managers on short-term contracts, whose livelihood
in the end depends on political or quasi-political patronage, have been an important instrument to deliver government policy. The barons of the public services and professions have all had cause to feel, from time to time, as 'conquered peoples of a once-
great civilisation'.
Performance management of public services and demands for professionals to be more accountable have been a general feature of the last decade. We can deride Charter standards. We all know how simplistic measures can be manipulated. Micro-management of waiting lists or waiting times is irksome and difficult. Nevertheless, very long waiting lists for elective admission have, in fact, disappeared and the vast majority of outpatients do see a doctor within a short period of the appointment time. I cannot think that has been a bad development.
Is it really all that unreasonable to ask a consultant to say when he or she is available for operating lists, ward rounds or outpatient clinics and to let other people know if his or her schedule has to be altered? That is what a job plan does.

Journal of the Royal College of Physicians of London Vol. 31 No. 2 March/April 1997

153

Forum

McGregor's theory X and theory Y were taught when I went to business school in 1969. McGregor favoured theory Y. He was part of a school of thought which became known as the 'human potential movement'. McGregor's writing was very much part of the optimistic 1960s, when it was bliss to be alive and to be young was very heaven. If McGregor is still taught in business schools I would be surprised if theory Y has been found to be a very good working model for industries which are downsizing and outsourcing as
the NHS has been for the last decade.
A better theory of organisation, contingency theory, suggests that different ways and styles of organisation are needed to respond effectively to different circumstances. General management was an effective
response to the needs of the 1980s. It was a harsh
prescription for harsh times. Later, the NHS reforms of the early 1990s were the expression in the health
service of a much wider social movement to increase
the power of consumers in relation to suppliers, including suppliers of professional services, and to mimic the dynamic of markets within public sector
organisations. An enterprise which consumes more than ?30
billion annually needs to be run in a business-like way, and be able to demonstrate that to its paymasters. We often try to count things that are very difficult to
count, and get it wrong. But the NHS cannot avoid
having to account for the vast amount of money it has to spend. Nor can we avoid responding to the domi-
nant social trends of the times we are in. But in the
drive to be more business-like it can easily be forgotten
that health services are not a business.
For me, the most illuminating writer on organisation is Amitai Etzioni, who defined hospitals, along with schools, universities and the church, as 'normative organisations'. Normative organisations are vehicles for custody and transmission of a society's fundamental values. The leadership of a normative

organisation rests de facto with the leading priests, teachers or doctors who embody the values and knowledge which are the purposes of the organisation. Key to effective management or administration of the economic aspects of such an organisation is that the administrator/manager has internalised its values and recognises the charismatic leadership of the practitioners.
General management in the NHS did fail to acknowledge these fundamentally important differences between management in industry and management in health services, although I think successful general managers all understood the difference. The market reforms of the NHS have stimulated many real improvements in service for patients and in efficiency, but do threaten to subvert the values of the health service.
Management is certainly not value neutral - nothing is. Managers and professionals need to share the same values. We cannot escape the economic, social or political realities of the times in which we live. Management is not a scholarly pursuit, and evidence based management is no more widely practised than evidence-based medicine. Nevertheless, in the modern world management is necessary. It need not be an evil.
Bibliography
McGregor DM. The human side of enterprise. McGraw Hill 1960. Brown RGS. Re-organising the National Health Service. Basil Bladewell
& Martin Robertson, 1979. Kogan, et al. Working relationships within the British hospital service.
Bookstall Publications, 1971. Etzioni A. A comparative analysis of complex organisations. Free Press,
1961.
Lawrence PR and Corsch IW. Organisation and environment. Richard D Irwin, 1969.
JOHN COOPER Chief Executive
Hammersmith Hospitals NHS Trust

154

Journal of the Royal College of Physicians of London Vol. 31 No. 2 March/April 1997

