chromic 3. the operative treatment of SUPPURATION OF THE FRONTAL

SINUS,

WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO THE METHOD

OF KILLIAN

y Arthur Logan Turner, M.D., F.R.C.S. Ed., Assistant Surgeon to Ear and Throat Department, Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh

(.Abstract.)
Indications for opening the sinus.?The somewhat numerous
^talities which have occurred after operation, the fact that lapses are not infrequently met with, and the possibility of
j;?nsiderable fully disfigurement attending a radical procedure are
Actors which must naturally cause the surgeon to weigh care-
the circumstances connected with each case before he
Ur?es operation upon his patient. Till more extended expense and improvements in our operative technic make it Possible to recommend operation in every case with almost

250 TREATMENT OF SUPPURATION OF THE FRONTAL SINUS
certain knowledge of obtaining permanent cure with the smallest amount of disfigurement, we must recognise certain symptoms and local conditions which make surgical interference imperalive, namely: (i) symptoms suggesting cerebral complications) (2) pain, usually of the nature of headache, which may be of a very severe and persistent type ; (3) distention of one of the bony walls of the cavity, or the presence of a fistula discharg' ing externally. If the general health of the patient is evidently affected by the continued suppuration, or if he should suffer from great mental depression and anxiety regarding his condition, a state of affairs which sometimes exists in these cases, We should not refrain from urging the operation. So far as we are able to ascertain, we cannot draw definite conclusions as to the percentage of cases of frontal sinus suppuration in which intra' cranial complications arise. That they do occur there is amp^e ?evidence to show, and there is the possibility that they may even occur more frequently than statistics would indicate. The more aggravated symptoms in some cases are relieved by treat'
ing the intranasal condition. If nasal polypi are thoroughly
removed, along with the anterior end of the middle turbinate bone, and the anterior ethmoidal cells opened into, better drain' age may be established and the outflow of secretion rendere
more easy.
Operative procedure.?Notwithstanding numerous opera
tions and their various modifications, many of which are asso ?dated with names of different surgeons, there are only
t^ main principles involved. (1) The sinus is opened and draine
into the nose, but its cavity is preserved ; or, (2) the sinus lS obliterated by the removal of one or more of its bony walls, 50
Ogston-L^C that there is no longer a cavity to deal with. The
operation consists in opening the frontal sinus through lts anterior wall, the size of opening being relative to the dimensi0^5 of the cavity, in careful curetting of its interior, and in esta lishing a large communication between the sinus and the nose' at the same time destroying the anterior ethmoidal cells in the region of the nasofrontal duct. Drainage into the nose insured by the introduction of a strip of gauze through t
ir^ nasofrontal aperture, and the operation is completed by
mediate suture of the skin incision. This operation is probaD y
used more widely than any other, yet results show that the c ^ of cases suitable for it is small, due to anatomical causes.

BY DR LOGAN TURNER

25 I

the operation for obliteration of the sinus, the method of
^uhnt is described, in which the whole of the anterior wall,
ar>d also to a greater or lesser extent the floor, is removed.
Postoperative mortality considered. Disfigurement. Osteo-
plastic operation used by some by raising a bone flap from the anterior wall of the sinus. Killian operation
for which the author claims the best radical treat-
Ascribed, ment of the disease with a minimum disfigurement. Killian
advises it in all cases even when there is no discomfort beyond
slight nasal discharge. Should a more general and extended
Experience prove equally satisfactory, it is possible that in the
Kalian operation we have at last obtained a method of dealing
vvith chronic frontal sinus suppuration in large and cornPlicated cavities, which may be regarded as the method par excellence. The whole sinus, with its recesses and partitions, is
thoroughly inspected, and the cavity is almost completely
obliterated by the resection of its anterior and inferior bony Vvalls. Further, by the removal of the ascending or frontal Process of the superior maxilla, excellent access is obtained to the ethmoidal cells, and a large opening of communication is thus made between the frontal sinus and the nasal cavity, establishing good drainage. To reduce to a minimum the
deformity which may follow so extensive a dissection, the
Supraorbital bony margin is preserved as a bridge between the ^p formed by removal of the anterior sinus wall and the floor.
Conclusions.?No single method of procedure is applicable in aH cases of chronic suppuration in the frontal sinus. When the sinus is small, and can be thoroughly inspected through an aperture made in anterior wall,and when no ethmoidal disease coexists,
simple opening by the Ogston-Luc method mayprove satisfactory.
In every other class of cases he would recommend and practise obliteration of the sinus by removal of its anterior and inferior walls. Whatever be the exact radical procedure adopted, there ls no doubt of the value of removing the ascending process of the superior maxilla in order to gain better access to the ethmoid labyrinth and nasal cavity.

