Original article
Is there a Role for Gallium67 Citrate SPECT/CT, in Patients with Renal Impairment or Who are Renal Transplant Recipients, in Identifying and Localizing Suspected Infection?
Ewa Nowosinska, Shaunak Navalkissoor1, Ann Marie Quigley1, John R. Buscombe2
Department of Nuclear Medicine, Barts Health NHS Trust, 1Department of Nuclear Medicine, Royal Free London NHS Foundation Trust, London, 2Department of Nuclear Medicine, Addenbrooke's Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom
Abstract
To assess the added value of singlephoton emission computed tomography/computed tomography (SPECT/CT) in patients with endstage renal failure (ESRF) or renal transplant recipients in whom focal infection was suspected. Gallium67 (Ga67) citrate scintigrams of 18 patients (10 in ESRF and eight with renal transplants) were reviewed. Sites of abnormal uptake seen on the whole body and SPECT were noted. A SPECT/CT was also reviewed to see if additional information could be obtained. Imaging results were compared with the final diagnosis. Overall, 14 out of 18 (78%) patients had a proven cause to explain symptoms while four patients did not have a final cause identified. Infection was proven in the final diagnosis in 12 out of 14 (86%) patients. Of the 10 patients with ESRF, six had confirmed infection with the Ga67 citrate study correctly identifying five out of six (83%) patients, and SPECT/CT providing additional information in four out of five (80%) patients. In the eight renal transplant recipients, six had a confirmed source of infection (all identified by the Ga67 citrate study). SPECT/CT provided additional information in two out of six (33%) patients. Ga67 citrate imaging had an overall sensitivity of 13/14 (93%), with one false negative. SPECT/ CT provided an additional contribution in eight out of 18 (44%) patients by better defining the location/extent of infection and differentiating the physiological from the pathological uptake.
Keywords: Gallium67 citrate, infection, renal failure, singlephoton emission computed tomography/computed tomography

Introduction
A major reason why patients with endstage renal failure (ESRF) have increased morbidity and mortality is infection.[13] Patients who have received a renal transplant are also susceptible to infection, primarily as a result of immunosuppression but also due to a shorter ureter predisposing to pyelonephritis.[46] Pyrexia of unknown origin (PUO) is a particularly common scenario in this population. Conventional crosssectional imaging may

Access this article online

Quick Response Code:

Website: www.wjnm.org

DOI: 10.4103/1450-1147.163250

fail to localize the cause of the fever. A nuclear medicine department serving a hospital with an active renal and renal transplant services may thus be asked to perform imaging in patients with suspected infection and inflammation. In our institution, it has been the practice for many years to opt for gallium67 (Ga67) citrate scintigraphy as the technique of choice in this clinical scenario. Ga67 citrate is a sensitive but nonspecific imaging agent that not only identifies the sites of infection but also detects other causes of PUO such as posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD) or other inflammatory diseases, e.g., sarcoidosis.[7,8] By 48 h postinjection, Ga67 citrate is not renally excreted and has no physiological uptake in noninflamed and noninfected kidneys. Consequently, it has potential advantages over Tc99m hexamethylpropyleneamine oxime (HMPAO) labeled white blood cells (WBCs) and F18fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) for imaging possible infections in the renal tract.[9,10]

Address for correspondence: Dr. Shaunak Navalkissoor, Nuclear Medicine, Royal Free London, London, NW3 2QG, United Kingdom. Email: shaunakn@hotmail.com

184

World Journal of Nuclear Medicine/Vol 14/Issue 3/September 2015

Nowosinska, et al.: Gallium-67 Citrate SPECT/CT in infection imaging of renal transplant/renal failure

The spatial resolution of Ga67 scintigraphy is poor due to the radionuclide having four photopeaks (93 keV, 185 keV, 288 keV, and 394 keV), all with relatively low abundance. The tracer is also taken up physiologically by various organs, i.e. at sites where there is no disease. Thus, variable uptake may be seen, e.g., in the colon and it can be difficult to identify the exact location of a site of abnormal uptake and determine whether the uptake is pathological or physiological.
The advent of high quality singlephoton emission computed tomography/computed tomography (SPECT/CT) has been shown to improve both localization and specificity in orthopedic and oncological conditions.[1113] In infection, it has been shown that the use of SPECT/CT has resulted in an improved accuracy of reporting, although none of these studies have looked at those patients with a renal transplant or significant renal failure.[1416]
The aim of this study was to determine whether SPECT/CT could improve the accuracy and the localization of Ga67 imaging in our institution when compared with our previous standard of whole body imaging (WBI) and SPECT (without CT), which was until recently the standard of care in our institution for patients with suspected infection who had ESRF or were renal transplant recipients.
Patients and Methods
General
This study is a retrospective review looking at a consecutive series of patients referred to nuclear medicine to identify the possible sites of sepsis. All these patients had had multiple previous radiological investigations without a cause being identified.
Patient population
A total of 18 patients were referred for Ga67 citrate SPECT/ CT from the renal unit over a 14month period [Table 1]. There were 10 patients in Group A comprising patients with ESRF attending a predialysis clinic or who were already on dialysis. Three of these patients had suspected infection of adult polycystic kidney disease (APCKD); three had suspected bone infections; three had a persistently raised Creactive protein (CRP), the cause of which had not been elucidated from other investigations; and one patient had a suspected graft infection.
Group B comprised eight patients all of whom had received a renal transplant, which was functioning in six patients. In three of these patients, an infected graft was suspected (although in one of these patients, the clinicians were unsure if the site of infection was native or due to transplant). In the fourth patient, the site of infection was thought to be within a cyst in a native

Table 1: Patient characteristics

Age/gender

Dialysis Clinical presentation

Group A patients with ESRF if on dialysis

63/Female

PD

PUO; APCKD

57/Male

Nil

APCKD Infected kidney

47/Male

Nil

APCKD? Left hip infection

86/Male

Nil

CRF, PUO, raised CRP

50/Male

HD

CRP raised

82/Male

HD

Lumbar spine pain? Infection

81/Female

Nil

? Lumbar discitis

90/Female

HD

? Discitis

83/Female

HD

? Vascular graft infection

65/Male

HD

CRP raised; unexplained abdominal pain

Group B patients with renal transplants

47/Male

No on HD ? Infected transplant

27/Female

Yes

? Infected transplant

52/Female

Yes

? Infected transplant/native kidney

45/Male

Yes

APCKD? Infected cyst

40/Female

No on HD ? infected vascular graft

37/Male

Yes

PUO

50/Male

Yes

PUO

61/Male

Yes

PUO? Infection? PTLD

APCKD: Adult polycystic kidney disease; CRF: Chronic renal failure; CRP: Creactive protein; HD: Hemodialysis; PD: Peritoneal dialysis; PTLD: Posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder; PUO: Pyrexia of unknown origin

polycystic kidney. Another patient was suspected of having a vascular graft infection. In three patients, the site was unknown although one of these patients was suspected of having PTLD.

Imaging protocol
Whole body Ga67 citrate scintigraphy was performed 48 h after injection of 150 MBq Ga67 citrate using a dualheaded, variableangle gammacamera (Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, Germany) fitted with a mediumenergy collimator. The three main energy peaks of Ga67, such as 93 keV, 184 keV, and 300 keV, were chosen. Whole body images were acquired at 8 cm/min. After inspection of the whole body images by a trained nuclear medicine physician, a SPECT/CT was performed of the body region that was suspected to contain the site of infection, or which had been suspicious on WBI.

SPECT images were acquired in a 60step (20 s/stop), 360° noncircular orbit and reconstructed in a 128 × 128 matrix, using a threedimensional ordered subsets expectation maximization algorithm. Data were reconstructed iteratively using Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, Germany with four subsets and eight iterations, and applying a Gaussian filter.

SPECT studies were viewed in the coronal, axial, and sagittal planes and in a reprojection.
A lowdose CT transmission scan was acquired after the SPECT study. The CT parameters used were a voltage of

World Journal of Nuclear Medicine/Vol 14/Issue 3/September 2015

185

Nowosinska, et al.: Gallium-67 Citrate SPECT/CT in infection imaging of renal transplant/renal failure

130 kVp and an electric charge of 4065 mAs (40 mAs for the thorax and 65 mAs for the abdomen) modulated with a "dosecare package." The CT was reconstructed using a 512 × 512 matrix at a slice thickness of 5 mm. Transmission data were registered with the emission data using the Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, Germany. CT correction for attenuation was applied to the SPECT images.
Matching pairs of X-ray transmission and nuclear medicine emission images were fused using the Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, Germany, and hybrid images of overlying transmission (CT) and emission (SPECT) data were generated.
In total, 34 regions (16 abdominal, 15 pelvic, and three chest) were evaluated. The SPECT/CT images were also visually inspected to exclude any misregistration using the reference landmarks. No misalignment was identified in the SPECT/CT studies of the 18 patients.
Interpretation criteria
Because many of these patients were frequent attenders at the department of nuclear medicine for multiple scintigraphic tests, a truly "blind" read of the results could not be achieved as these patients were wellknown to all the staff. Therefore, readings by two experienced nuclear medicine specialists were performed in a clinical scenario and they were aware of the patients' clinical history and the results of previously performed conventional imaging tests before they reviewed the scintigraphic data, including the planar and the SPECT images, recording any sites of suspected pathology. After the results of the planar and the SPECT images had been recorded, the SPECT/CT images were subsequently evaluated and interpreted in the same manner. Any focus of increased uptake not related to normal physiologic biodistribution of radiopharmaceutical in the suspicious region was considered to represent pathology. Any disagreements on the interpretation were settled by a consensual agreement between the two specialists.
SPECT/CT was considered contributory when it provided data that could not be obtained from the assessment of the planar and the SPECT images alone concerning the presence of pathology or its precise location. The results were then compared with the final diagnosis, which was derived from the microbiological findings (n = 11), histology (n = 1), and/ or correlative imaging data (n = 14).
Results
Patients with renal failure/on dialysis (Group A)
In the 10 patients with severe renal impairment (Group A), infection was confirmed in six (60%) patients [Table 2]. In

five out of six (83%) patients, the whole body and SPECT study identified the site of infection correctly. In one out of six (17%) patients (patient 7), the final diagnosis of discitis was not identified on the Ga67 study. In four out of five (80%) patients (patients 2, 3, 6, and 10), SPECT/CT was able to localize and define the extent of infection more precisely than the planar and the SPECT alone. Of the remaining four patients, no infection was found in three patients (patients 1, 4, 8), with SPECT/CT adding value in one patient, confirming the focal uptake on conventional scintigraphy to be physiological (patient 1). The last patient (patient 5) had inflammatory disease identified.
Patients with transplants (Group B)
There were six (75%) confirmed infections in the eight patients with renal transplants that were imaged. All the six patients were diagnosed using the Ga67 citrate scan. SPECT/CT provided additional information for two out of six (33%) patients (patients 15 and 17). In patient 15, the uptake was confirmed to localize to a soft tissue collection (and not bowel uptake) while in patient 17, the extent of infection was better defined on SPECT/CT.
One of the remaining patients had myositis (which was seen equally well with conventional scintigraphy and SPECT/CT). The last remaining patient had PTLD, and SPECT/CT helped raise the suspicion of this diagnosis as lymph node uptake was not identified on the whole body or SPECT alone.
Summary
Of the 18 patients imaged, 14 (78%) had a proven cause to explain the symptoms while four patients did not have a final cause identified. Infection was proven as the final diagnosis in 12 out of 14 (86%) patients. Ga67 imaging had an overall sensitivity of 13/14 (93%), with one false negative. SPECT/CT provided an additional contribution in eight out of 18 (44%) patients by better defining the location/extent of infection and differentiating the physiological from the pathological uptake.
Discussion
The results of this retrospective study show that SPECT/CT can improve the accuracy of Ga67 citrate imaging in this patient group. In our study, like that of others reported in the literature, the main improvement is of specificity.[1016] The site of tracer uptake could more accurately be defined [Figures 1 and 2]. In addition, a contemporaneous CT (albeit noncontrast and of reduced mAs) may enable a diagnosis to be established even if there is no Ga67 uptake at that site.[14,15]
This study demonstrated that SPECT/CT contributed additional information that was clinically useful in over 40% of the patients imaged. This additional

186

World Journal of Nuclear Medicine/Vol 14/Issue 3/September 2015

Nowosinska, et al.: Gallium-67 Citrate SPECT/CT in infection imaging of renal transplant/renal failure

Table 2: Clinical results

Patient no.

WB+SPECT

SPECT/CT

Contribution of SPECT/CT

Final diagnosis

Group A patients with endstage renal failure if on dialysis

1

Uptake adjacent to kidney (bowel) Negative

Excluded uptake as physiological No infection

2

Uptake in one kidney

Upper pole one kidney cyst Defined level/extent of abnormality Infection in kidney cyst

3

Uptake in left hip

Left hip infection

Defined level/extent of abnormality Infected left hip

4

Negative

Negative

None

AAA: Noninfected

5

Uptake l SCJ

Degenerative left SCJ

None

Inflammation left SCJ

6

Uptake l3

Uptake l3l4 disc

Define level/extent of abnormality Discitis

7

Negative

Negative

None

Discitis

8

Physiological large bowel

Physiological activity

None

No infection/inflammation

9

Uptake right lung

Right lower lobe

None

Pneumonia

10

Left abdomen

Splenic collection

Defined location and confirmed as a soft tissue collection

Pancreatitis and splenic collection

Group B patients with renal transplants

11

Uptake in transplant

Uptake in transplant

None

Infected transplant

12

Uptake in thigh muscles

Uptake in thigh muscles

None

Myositis

13

Uptake in native kidney and

Uptake in native kidney

None

transplant

and transplant

Infected native kidney and transplant

14

Uptake in native kidney

Uptake in native kidney

None

Infected native kidney

15

Uptake RIF

Abscess RIF

Defined focal uptake as infection Abscess RIF

16

Uptake in lungs

Uptake in lungs

Nil

Chest infection

17

Uptake in right flank

Infection: Right psoas

Defined extent of infection

Psoas and pelvic abscess

extending into right pelvis

18

Uptake in spine and left ilium

Uptake in spine, left ilium Lymph node not seen on planar/

PTLD

and abdominal nodes

SPECT

AAA: Abdominal aortic aneurysm; AVN: Avascular necrosis; PTLD: Posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder; SCJ: Sternoclavicular joint; RIF: Right iliac fossa

information may justify the additional radiation burden of 12 mSv in these patients attributed to the use of CT. The additional financial cost of SPECT/CT versus SPECT alone may also be justified if a diagnosis is reached more promptly.

Despite these patients being recognized as a clinically challenging group, the results of this study are similar to that obtained in other studies looking at different patient groups. For example, in 82 patients with a mixture of soft tissue and bone infections imaged with In111 leukocytes or Ga67 citrate, additional information was found in 48% of patients by the additional use of SPECT/CT.[17] In a group of 28 patients with orthopedic infections imaged with Tc99m HMPAOlabeled WBCs, SPECT/CT produced an improved accuracy of reporting in 36% of patients.[16] In addition, there are case reports that show the utility of Ga67 citrate SPECT/CT in suspected adult with infected polycystic kidneys and perirenal transplant infections.[810]

a

b

c

d

Figure 1: Ga-67 citrate study in a renal transplant recipient with fever of unknown origin (patient 17). The whole-body study (a) suggests uptake in the right posterior upper abdomen suspicious of infection in the native right kidney. A transverse SPECT (b), low dose CT (c), and fused SPECT/CT (d) were viewed. On SPECT/CT, abnormal uptake lies within the right psoas muscle and posterior pararenal space and is separate from the right kidney

An alternative method would be to use F18 FDG positron emission tomographyCT (PETCT). A series of studies has shown that this modality can be accurate in patients with a wide range of infections including PUO.[1821] While there are no studies in the same patient groups like that of our study [chronic renal failure (CRF) and postrenal transplant], the incidence of infection lying

within the renal tract itself was high (29%). Using F18 FDG PETCT, the route of tracer elimination (i.e. renal) can lead to difficulties in the interpretation of the images, as the pathological tracer uptake is much more difficult to distinguish than the physiological. In a few reports, there has been limited evidence that F18 FDG PET may still be useful in the infected renal cyst.[22,23] In addition, the

World Journal of Nuclear Medicine/Vol 14/Issue 3/September 2015

187

Nowosinska, et al.: Gallium-67 Citrate SPECT/CT in infection imaging of renal transplant/renal failure

b

a

c

d
Figure 2: Ga-67 citrate study in a renal transplant recipient with fever of unknown origin and a suspected vascular graft infection (patient 15). The whole body study (a) suggests uptake within the right iliac fossa. A transverse SPECT (b), low dose CT (c), and fused SPECT/CT (d) were viewed. The SPECT/CT demonstrates
that the abnormal uptake of tracer localized to a soft tissue collection in the right iliac fossa, which was confirmed as an
abscess on ultrasound aspirate
use of F18 FDG for infection imaging is not universally funded or reimbursed.
Therefore, it would appear from this retrospective review that SPECT/CT in Ga67 citrate imaging may have a role in imaging infection in patients with advanced renal disease, on dialysis or having received a renal transplant. Further work needs to be done to determine if SPECT/CT can be combined with other single photon imaging agents such as radiolabeled leukocytes.
References
1. Dalrymple LS, Johansen KL, Chertow GM, Cheng SC, Grimes B, Gold EB, et al. Infectionrelated hospitalizations in older patients with ESRD. Am J Kidney Dis 2010;53:52230.
2. Iseki K, Tozawa M, Yoshi S, Fukiyama K. Serum Creactive protein (CRP) and risk of death in chronic dialysis patients. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1999;14:195660.
3. Akbar SA, Jafri SZ, Amendola MA, Madrazo BL, Salem R, Bis KG. Complications of renal transplantation. Radiographics 2005;25:133556.
4. Po u r m a n d G , Po u r m a n d M , S a l e m S , M e h r s a i A , Taheri Mahmoudi M, Nikoobakht M, et al. Posttransplant infectious complications: A prospective study on 142 kidney allograft recipients. Urol J 2006;3:2331.
5. Zukowski M, Bohatyrewicz R, Biernawska J, Kotfis K, Zegan M, Knap R, et al. Risk factors for septic complications in kidney transplant recipients. Transplant Proc 2009;41:30435.
6. Dupont PJ, Psimenou E, Lord R, Buscombe JR, Hilson AJ, Sweny P. Late recurrent urinary tract infections may produce renal allograft scarring even in the absence of symptoms or vesicoureteric reflux. Transplantation 2007;84:3515.
7. Chiffoleau S, Chatal JF, Talmant C, Vasseur F, Soulillou JP. The respective roles of gallium 67 citrate scanning and diagnostic ultrasound in detecting suppurations in renal allograft recipients. Pathol Biol (Paris) 1980;28:1559.
8. Tzen KY, Yen TC, Lin KJ. Perirenal, peripelvic, and upper ureter

abscesses in a nearly nonfunctioning kidney demonstrated by Tc99m DMSA and Ga67 renal SPECT. Clin Nucl Med 1999;24:68.
9. Tsang V, Lui S, Hilson A, Moorhead J, Fernando O, Sweny P. Gallium67 scintigraphy in the detection of infected polycystic kidneys in renal transplant recipients. Nucl Med Commun 1989;10:16770.
10. Amesur P, Castronuovo JJ, Chandramouly B. Infected cyst localization with gallium SPECT imaging in polycystic kidney disease. Clin Nucl Med 1988;13:357.
11. Utsunomiya D, Shiraishi S, Imuta M, Tomiguchi S, Kawanaka K, Morishita S, et al. Added value of SPECT/CT fusion in assessing suspected bone metastasis: Comparison with scintigraphy alone and nonfused scintigraphy and CT. Radiology 2006;238:26471.
12. Papathanassiou D, Flament JB, Pochart JM, Patey M, Marty H, Liehn JC, et al. SPECT/CT in localization of parathyroid adenoma or hyperplasia in patients with previous neck surgery. Clin Nucl Med 2008;33:3947.
13. Krausz Y, Keidan Z, Kogan I, EvenSapir E, BarShalom R, Engel A, et al. SPECT/CT hybrid imaging with 111Inpentetreotide in assessment of neuroendocrine tumours. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 2003;59:56573.
14. Filippi L, Schillaci O. SPECT/CT with hybrid camera: A new imaging modality for the functional and anatomical mapping of infections. Expert Rev Med Devices 2006;3:699703.
15. Horger M, Eschmann SM, Pfannenberg C, Storek D, Vonthein R, Claussen CD, et al. Added value of SPECT/CT in patients suspected of having bone infection: Preliminary results. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg 2007;127:21121.
16. Filippi L, Schillaci O. Usefulness of hybrid SPECT/CT in 99m TcHMPAOlabelled leukocyte scintigraphy for bone and joint infections. J Nucl Med 2006;47:190813.
17. BarShalom R, Yefremov N, Guralnik L, Keidar Z, Engel A, Nitecki S, et al. SPECT/CT using 67Ga and 111Inlabelled leukocyte scintigraphy for diagnosis of infection. J Nucl Med 2006;47:58794.
18. BleekerRovers CP, de Kleijn EM, Corstens FH, van der Meer JW, Oyen WJ. Clinical value of FDG PET in patients with fever of unknown origin and patients suspected of focal infection or inflammation. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 2004;31:2937.
19. BleekerRovers CP, Vos FJ, Mudde AH, Dofferhoff AS, de GeusOei LF, Rijnders AJ, et al. A prospective multicentre study of the value of FDGPET as part of a structured diagnostic protocol in patients with fever of unknown origin. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 2007;34:694703.
20. Keidar Z, GurmanBalbir A, Gaitini D, Israel O. Fever of unknown origin: The role of 18FFDG PET/CT. J Nucl Med 2008;49:19805.
21. Balink H, Collins J, Bruyn GA, Gemmel F. F18 FDG PET/CT in the diagnosis of fever of unknown origin. Clin Nucl Med 2009;34:8628.
22. BleekerRovers CP, de Sévaux RG, van Hamersvelt HW, Corstens FH, Oyen WJ. Diagnosis of renal and hepatic cyst infections by 18Ffluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography in autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease. Am J Kidney Dis 2003;41:E1821.
23. Soussan M, Sberro R, Wartski M, Fakhouri F, Pecking AP, Alberini JL. Diagnosis and localization of renal cyst infection by 18Ffluorodeoxyglucose PET/CT in polycystic kidney disease. Ann Nucl Med 2008;22:52931.
How to cite this article: Nowosinska E, Navalkissoor S, Quigley AM, Buscombe JR. Is there a Role for Gallium-67 Citrate SPECT/CT, in Patients with Renal Impairment or Who are Renal Transplant Recipients, in Identifying and Localizing Suspected Infection?. World J Nucl Med 2015;14:184-8.
Source of Support: Nil. Conflict of Interest: None declared.

188

World Journal of Nuclear Medicine/Vol 14/Issue 3/September 2015

