14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

DOI: 10.1111/dmcn.15355
A B S T R AC T S

Scientific Presentations

Thursday, September 22, 2022 Free Paper Session A: Early Development and Intervention
A1 | Keypoint Detection to Analyze Infant General Movements
J PULIDO1, A MYLAVARAPU2, S ZANELLI 3, L LETZKUS4 1Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA; 2University of Virginia, South Riding, VA, USA; 3University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA; 4University of Virginia, Earlysville, VA, USA
Background and Objective(s): Early identification of infants at high risk for abnormal neurodevelopment is critical so that interventions can begin without delay. The general movement assessment (GMA) is a validated qualitative tool shown to reliably predict the risk of motor disability including cerebral palsy (CP). However, the GMA can be resource-­ intensive, and maintaining certification among healthcare staff limits accessibility. We hypothesize that machine learning models such as pose estimation and keypoint detection can complement the qualitative analysis of infants' general movements (GMs) and predict differences in motor trajectory. Objective: To develop an automated quantitative method to analyze infants' GMs utilizing machine learning techniques. Study Design: Retrospective. Study Participants & Setting: Academic NICU; 76 infants. Materials/Methods: GMA videos were obtained as part of clinical care and video quality was optimized by recording videos from above and ensuring all limbs were visible at all times. A two-­step model composed of (1) pose estimation and (2) CP movement pattern detection is in development. In the first step, a pre-­trained neural network uses real-­time pose estimation to determine body coordinates. The infant's poses are inferred by detecting 17 anatomic keypoints (eyes, ears, nose, shoulders, elbows, wrists, hips, knees, and ankles) using the Detectron2 X101-­FPN model. Keypoint accuracy was determined using Object Keypoint Similarity (OKS) as a standard metric. Subsequently, 10 equally spaced frames for each of the videos averaging 4.8 minutes in length were extracted for manual annotation using the Annotation Tool. The model then produced the positional coordinates of these key points relative to the image.

Results: 76 infant participants were analyzed. Participants were split into 62 training participants for developing the keypoint detection model and 14 test participants for measuring key point accuracy. A benchmark model trained on the Common Objects in Context (COCO) dataset attained a model performance of 0.83 OKS. Our new model trained on custom data improved the keypoint detection accuracy performance in the NICU setting by achieving 0.91 OKS, a 9% improvement in keypoint accuracy. Conclusions/Significance: Automated pose estimation is the first step of a two-­step model to quantitatively evaluate GMs in neonates. Out-­of-­the-­box models (COCO) fail to adapt to visual patterns in the clinical setting and re-­training of the model on videos captured of NICU neonates improves the pose estimation performance. The next step will be to develop the movement model using movement features such as limb velocity and angle of appendages to classify GMs. These results show that machine learning techniques are a promising avenue to provide low-­cost tools for motor dysfunctions prediction in at-­risk neonates.
A2 | Measuring Problem- solving in Infants Two to Nine Months Adjusted Age
R MOLININI1, K BOWLER2, K INAMDAR3, E MARCINOWSKI4, C RHEE5, T TRIPATHI6, A SALGAONKAR7, S DUSING8 1Virginia Commonwealth University, Henrico, VA, USA; 2Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA; 3Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond; 4Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA; 5University of Southern California, Los Angeles; 6Victoria Infant Brain Studies, USA; 7Division of Biokinesiology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA 8University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
Background and Objective(s): Early diagnosis of cerebral alsy (CP) enables targeted early interventions to improve outcomes. The General Movements Assessment (GMA) is a good predictor of CP when performed aged 3 months. The GMA involves observation of the infant lying on their back and movements graded by a trained assessor, however, access to trained assessors is a limiting factor for population- scale screening. Advances in machine learning allow automatic tracking of limb movement from video. We describe a deep

© 2022 The Authors. Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology © 2022 Mac Keith Press Dev Med Child Neurol. 2022;64(Suppl. 4):5-79.

wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/dmcn | 5

6 |
learning method to extract infant movement patterns from smartphone videos. Using this data, we aimed to predict abnormal or absent general movements based on expert GMA ratings. Study Design: Diagnostic study, prospective cohort Study Participants & Setting: We analysed 484 videos from 327 infants, 12 to 14 weeks corrected age: 158 extremely premature (<28weeks) & 169 term controls (>37weeks) of infants born at a tertiary care hospital in Australia. GMA was performed on each video by up to 3 assessors. Each infant was classified as having normal or abnormal/absent general movements. 58 (12%) had abnormal or absent movements. Materials/Methods: We trained a deep learning model to label 18 keypoints in videos of infants. A training set of 100 videos with 5 frames manually labelled was compiled. Labelling error was compared with inter- rater error of 2 independent raters. We used the trained to label keypoints across all video frames. Keypoints trajectories were processed to remove outliers and adjust for camera movement, normalised by video length & infant size and smoothed. A second deep learning model classified infant movement patterns. Trajectories were split into sequences of 128 frames (~5s). During training, 1D convolutional networks were used to extract timeseries features from 10 random sequences per video. Features were passed through 4 fully connected layers overlaid by an attention layer to generate subject- level redictions of normal or abnormal/absent movement. To combat overfitting, we applied timeseries warping and random scaling to each sequence and used dropout and batch normalisation layers. Data was split into a train (50%), test (25%) and validation (25%) set. The model was trained over 1500 epochs, retaining the model with the best test set performance. Final performance was evaluated in the unseen validation set. This process was repeated 25 times. We report rea under the curve (AUC), balanced accuracy, positive & negative predicative value (PPV, NPV) averaged over 25 repeats. Results: Keypoint labelling was accurate, error 4.4 pixels compared to manual labels. The classifier achieved AUC 0.65±0.07 and balanced accuracy 0.59±0.07. Conclusions/Significance: We used a deep learning approach to track movement patterns and predict expert GMA ratings in infants at 12 to 14 weeks. Our model achieved high labelling accuracy of body parts and, using a cutoff of 0.5, we correctly detected abnormal/absent movements in 33% of infants with specificity of 89%. This work highlights the potential for automated approaches to screen for CP at a population level.

ABSTRACTS
A3 | Early Detection of Cerebral Palsy Among a High-­ risk Cohort in Low Resource Settings
T KARIM1, A TE VELDE2, S AHMED3, M ISLAM3, C MORGAN4, I NOVAK5, G KHANDAKER6, N BADAWI7 1Specialty of Child and Adolescent Health, Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia; 2Cerebral Palsy Alliance, The University of Sydney, Camperdown, New South Wales, Australia; 3CSF Global, Dhaka, Bangladesh; 4Cerebral Palsy Alliance, Camperdown, New South Wales, Australia; 5The University of Sydney, Camperdown, New South Wales, Australia; 6Central Queensland Public Health Unit, Central Queensland Hospital and Health Service, Rockhampton, Queensland, Australia; 7Grace Centre for Newborn Intensive Care, Cerebral Palsy Alliance, University of Sydney, Westmead, New South Wales, Australia
Background and Objective(s): Delayed diagnosis of cerebral palsy (CP) limits access to early interventions when the infant brain has the most neuroplastic potential, particularly in low-a­nd middle-­income countries (LMICs). The 2017 clinical guideline on the early diagnosis of CP outlines best practice tools to support diagnosis. We aimed to assess the feasibility of implementing these tools for early detection of CP in Bangladesh. Study Design: Prospective cohort study. Study Participants & Setting: Neonates admitted to a regional tertiary hospital neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) in Bangladesh with major risk factors for CP (preterm birth, hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy/neonatal encephalopathy (HIE/NE), neonatal sepsis and/or severe jaundice/kernicterus) were enrolled. Materials/Methods: A physician identified eligible neonates via physical assessment, medical record review and parent interview using a risk factor questionnaire developed for this study. General Movements Assessment (GMA) were completed at the time of recruitment (writhing period) and 13weeks corrected age (fidgety age); neuroimaging data collected from the NICU; and Hammersmith Infant Neurological Examination (HINE) conducted at 12 months corrected age. Due to the impact of COVID-­19, a proportion of the cohort were not able to have GMA fidgety videos completed and the first HINE assessment was delayed to 12 months. GMA data is not currently reported in this abstract. Results: A total of 227 high risk neonates were recruited between November 2019 to March 2020. All neonates had evidence for prematurity and infection/sepsis on physical examination, 83.7% (n=190) had HIE/NE and 14.5% (n=33) had severe jaundice/kernicterus. Only 1.8% (n=4) had cranial ultrasound and none had magnetic resonance imaging. Of the surviving (76.7%, n=174) infants, 77.0% (n=134) were assessed at 12 months. Among them, writhing videos and fidgety videos were previously collected for 100% (n=134) and 29.9% (n=40) respectively. At 12 months, 32.1% (n=43) infants were identified to have CP of whom 90.7% (n=39)

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ABSTRACTS
infants had global HINE score <66 (sensitivity 90.7% and specificity: 97.8%). Conclusions/Significance: Despite study attrition and the impact of COVID-­19, it was feasible to collect GMA videos in inpatient setting and infants at risk of CP were diagnosed as early as 12 months in a LMIC. Use of the structured risk factor questionnaire and adherence to best practice guidelines ensured a highly sensitive screening process and diagnostic outcomes. Our interim findings demonstrate the scope of this simple and scalable protocol in supporting clinicians for the early identification of infants with CP to facilitate early intervention and shared decision-­making with families for best outcomes in LMICs.
A4 | Optimizing Early Identification of Cerebral Palsy Using the General Movements Assessment: A Quality Improvement Initiative
G MUELLER1, K HARPSTER2, E RICK3, C OAKES3, K MCHUGH3, E MANFORD3, A PINGER3 1Cincinnati Children's, Springboro, OH, USA; 2Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA; 3Cincinnati Children's, Cincinnati, OH, USA
Background and Objective(s): Cerebral Palsy (CP) is the most common motor disability in childhood. Although CP is caused by an abnormality or injury to the neonatal/perinatal brain, diagnosis is often delayed until 12 to 24 months of age. Late diagnosis leads to missed opportunities for early interventions during a crucial time of cortical reorganization and brain neuroplasticity. There is a strong push in the field of rehabilitation to complete assessments on infants at high risk for CP prior to 5 months of age. Therefore, the aim of this study is to increase the number of infants at high risk for cerebral palsy who received the Prechtl Quality Assessment of General Movements (GMA) in the newborn intensive care unit (NICU) and NICU Follow-­up Clinic (NFC). We will describe the quality improvement methods used to improve completion of the GMA and discuss lessons learned. Study Design: Prospective cohort study of high risk infants. Study Participants & Setting: Infants under 5 months corrected age who are at high risk for CP at a pediatric hospital in the Midwest. Materials/Methods: Global and SMART (specific, measurable, attainable, realistic and time-­bound) aims were developed, and interventions were carried out from September 2015 to September 2021. Quality improvement initiatives included failure mode and effects analysis, key driver diagrams, Plan-­Do-­Study-­Act cycles, and Lean methodology. The key driver diagram was utilized to identify influential factors (e.g., accurate identification of infant needing GMA, readily available supplies to record GMA, documentation of GMA, etc.) that would impact progress towards reaching the

 |7
smart aim of increasing the percentage of infants receiving the GMA. Failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA) was utilized to determine the failures at each step of the NFC visit process with planned interventions pulled from the key driver diagram. Application of Lean methodology for this QI initiative in the NICU included compiling baseline data, mapping the current GMA process, and identifying areas of inefficiency to reduce variation in care. Data was collected on completion rate of GMA on consecutive infants using run and control charts in the NICU and NFC. Results: Baseline data was collected over a 16-­month period and the quality improvement data was collected for 56 months. The initiative exhibited an increase in percentage of completed GMAs in both the NICU and NFC from 5% to 78% and 29% to 89%, respectively. The Interventions with significant impact on the data included implementation of electronic medical record documentation to track GMA dates and GMA readiness and provider and staff education. Conclusions/Significance: QI methods and tools used were successful in increasing the number of GMAs completed for infants at high risk for CP.
A5 | Performance of the General Movement Assessment and Hammersmith Infant Neurological Evaluation in Tandem to Identify Early Asymmetries and Provide More Comprehensive Guide for Intervention
C WEIGEL1, A GOETGELUCK2, L BOSWELL3, J AVERY2, M SANTELLA3, R DEREGNIER2 1Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, M Health Fairview, St Paul, MN, USA; 2Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA; 3Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
Background and Objective(s): The Prechtl General Movement Assessment (GMA) and Hammersmith Infant Neurological Evaluation (HINE) are tools that support early identification of neuromotor deficits including the presence of asymmetries. Within the detailed GMA, movement and postural patterns are scored to give a motor optimality score (MOS) where asymmetries can be identified. Furthermore, asymmetries indicated on the MOS paired with the HINE may provide a more comprehensive guide for interventions as one supports analysis of spontaneous motor patterns vs elicited motor function to improve outcomes. Study Design: A diagnostic retrospective cohort study using consecutive sampling. Study Participants & Setting: Between 8/2019 and 10/2021, 184 infants were assessed using the GMA and HINE as part of their 3-­month NICU follow up clinic evaluation. The median gestational age was 32weeks (IQR 27-­38). The median video PMA was 53weeks (IQR 51-­55).

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

8 |

ABSTRACTS

Materials/Methods: Detailed scores and asymmetries were collected using the GMA and HINE within one week of each other. Each GMA video was assessed using the MOS. Documented asymmetries between the two assessments were compared to evaluate correlation, sensitivity and clinical usefulness. Results: GMA ratings included 167 normal fidgety, 15 absent or sporadic, 2 abnormal. Median MOS was 24 (IQR 22-­ 26). One or more asymmetries were noted for 120 (65.2%) of the infants. The most common asymmetry on the GMA was lack of head centering (52.9%). Infants with asymmetries had a lower MOS (MOS 24; IQR 21-­26) than infants without asymmetries (MOS 26, IQR 24-­26, p<0.001). Median HINE was 65 (IQR 59.5-­68). 108 infants (58.7%) had asymmetries on the HINE. Asymmetry of lateral tilting was most frequently observed on the HINE (36.6%). MOS and HINE asymmetries were not strongly correlated (p=0.08). Infants with any GMA asymmetry tended to have lower MOS scores (p<0.001) and lower HINE scores (p=0.006). Infants with any asymmetry on the HINE had lower HINE scores (p=0.017) but not lower MOS scores (p=0.93). Head posture asymmetry on the HINE was more frequent in infants with "head not centered" on the GMA video (p=0.004; OR 3.17; 95% Cl: 1.44-­7.00). Infants with PMA <53weeks had similar MOS and HINE asymmetries as infants with PMA >53weeks. Conclusions/Significance: Results indicate clinical relevance in performing the GMA-­MOS and HINE in tandem for early identification of neuromotor deficits and asymmetries to further guide early intervention referral and strategies. Infants with asymmetries had suboptimal scores on the MOS and HINE, supporting referral to early intervention services. The asymmetry finding of "head not centered" occurring most frequently and concurrently between the two tests guides therapies to focus on development of postural control. Future analysis of later functional outcomes of infants with early asymmetries and continuation of the HINE to document asymmetries over time will help us understand if these patterns are predictive to establish more individualized interventions and support early intervention to optimize outcomes.

A6 | Using the Center of Pressure Movement Analysis in Evaluating Spontaneous Movements in Infants: A Comparative Study with General Movements Assessment
H CELIK1, A YILDIZ2, R YILDIZ3, A MUTLU4, A SOYLU5, K GULLU6, K GUCUYENER7, A DUYAN CAMURDAN7, E KOC7, E ONAL7, B ELBASAN8 1Lokman Hekim University, Ankara, Turkey; 2Gazi University, Faculty of Health Sciences, Department of Physiotherapy and Rehabilitation, Ankara, Turkey; 3Gazi University, Faculty of Health Sciences, Department of Physiotherapy and Rehabilitation, Ankara, Turkey; 4Hacettepe University, Faculty of Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation, Samanpazari, Ankara, Turkey; 5Hacettepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Biophysics, Samanpazari, Ankara, Turkey; 6Hacettepe University, Faculty of Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation, Samanpazari, Ankara, Turkey; 7Gazi University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Ankara, Turkey; 8Gazi University, Department of Physiotherapy and Rehabilitation, Ankara, Turkey
wwStudy Design: This study had a cross-­sectional and diagnostic study design. Study Participants & Setting: The infants included in the study (1) had the post-­term age between 9 and 20weeks; (2) without any genetic/metabolic syndrome and orthopedic deficit; and (3) used no medications, such as anticonvulsants, that can affect movements. A total of 101 infants were included in the study. According to the global GMA results, the infants were assigned to Normal FMs and Absent FMs groups. In the final analyses, while the normal FMs group consisted of 88 infants (40 girls and 48 boys) with a mean post-­term age of 14.1weeks (±2.9), and the absent FMs group consisted of 13 infants (8 girls and 5 boys) with mean post-­ term age of 12.6weeks (±3.2) Materials/Methods: The COP movement data was recorded by Kistler force plate (model: 9260AA) with a sampling frequency of 50 Hz. The infants were placed in the supine position on the force plate, with the cranial-­caudal orientation of the infant aligned parallel to the length of the force plate. In this position, the recording of COP data and video were made simultaneously for 3 minutes while the infants were awake, active, and calm. The global GMA and Motor Optimality Score Revised (MOS-­R) were determined according to Prechtl's Method. Results: Binary logistic regression analysis was conducted to investigate if there is a relationship between Global GMA and COP movement parameters. The three predictors in the logistic regression were found to contribute to the model significantly. Metrics for evaluating the performance of the logistic regression model were calculated using the confusion matrix. The overall accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity of this model with two predictors were found to be 83%, 85%, and 83%, respectively. A significant linear regression equation was found with the standard error of 1.82 points to predict the MOS-­R total score.

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ABSTRACTS

 |9

Conclusions/Significance: Although the method presented in this study, which has the potential to be used in neonatal and pediatric follow-­up clinics, is not an alternative to observational GMA, it is considered that the use of the two methods together will provide more quantitative and detailed data about infants' movement and may be useful in identifying infants with absent FMs and referring them to age-­specific individual early intervention as early as possible.
A7 | The BRIGHT Coaching Program for Caregivers of Children with Emerging Developmental Delays: Perspectives, Satisfaction With, and Reported Impacts of the Program
T OGOURTSOVA1, A MAJNEMER2, M O'DONNELL3, J FILLITER4, K WITTMEIER5 1Jewish Rehabilitation Hospital/McGill University, Dollard-­ des-­Ormeaux, QC, Canada; 2School of Physical and Occupational Therapy, McGill University; Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre; Department of Pediatrics, McGill University; Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada; 3University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 4Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada; 5University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada
Background and Objective(s): The BRIGHT Coaching program is a 12-­month e-­health coaching intervention designed for caregivers of children with emerging developmental delays. The national clinical trial examining program's effectiveness is in final stages of data collection. We aimed to explore participants' overall perspectives, satisfaction, and perceived impacts. Study Design: A mixed-­method study design. Study Participants & Setting: Caregivers of preschoolers with emerging developmental delays. Materials/Methods: Participants from the intervention group were invited to complete an online exit interview at post-­treatment. The interview included a survey (19 questions rated on a 4-­point scale ranging from "Not at all" -­ "Very much") and 7 open-­ended questions. The interview addressed caregivers' satisfaction with the program's content, format, approach, and connection with the coach, and explored program's impacts and challenges. Data analysis consisted of descriptive statistics and a content evaluation. Results: Eighty-­seven (64.4%) participants from the intervention group (n=135) completed the BRIGHT Coaching program and the exit interview. Among them, 74.4 to 82.8% reported that they were "Very much" satisfied with the program's content, the tele-­coaching format, and the supporting materials. Nearly all (94.3%) were "Very much" satisfied with their coach. The program's completeness, engagement, usefulness, and relevance to caregiver's current situation were also highly rated by 71.3 to 81.6% of respondents. One-­ hundred and sixty-­five statements were coded as program's impacts. The most common impacts included: (1) Increased

knowledge about resources (32 statements, "The BRIGHT Coaching program has given me confidence to be a better advocate for my child and to get a grasp on what tools I can use to make our diagnosis journey clearer."); (2) Gained support (30, "I appreciated having access to extra support. It was nice having someone to talk to about parenting and realizing that I am not alone in my worries and concerns"); and (3) Better understanding on how to help their child (20, "The program has absolutely been key to my coping with my child's diagnosis and to understand how to help him"). Other positive impacts included enhanced relationships with others, an increased ability to voice opinions, improved acceptance of the situation, improved mental health, among others. Areas for improvement or program-­related challenges included website functionality, logistic/time management difficulties, lack of parent-­to-­parent interactions, and difficulty sharing at coaching sessions. Conclusions/Significance: The BRIGHT Coaching program was highly rated by participants, who conveyed being very satisfied with multiple aspects of the intervention. Reported impacts indicate that participants have gained a sense of empowerment and that the program had a wide influence on personal and environmental factors, allowing them to effectively manage difficult situations. The reported challenges will be considered by the team at the implementation phase to optimize the intervention.
A8 | Developmental Characteristics of under-­5 Children in Southwestern Nigeria: A Pointer to the Need for Early Detection and Intervention
O OLORUNMOTENI1, A ADEOMI2, P NWOKU3 1Obafemi Awolowo University/Obafemi Awolowo University Teaching Hospitals Complex, Ile-­Ife, Osun, Nigeria; 2Department of Community Health, Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile-­Ife, Osun, Nigeria; 3Obafemi Awolowo University Teaching Hospitals Complex, Ile-­Ife, Osun, Nigeria
Background and Objective(s): Developmental disorders have been observed to remain undiagnosed in about half of children until school entry age. This is particularly worse in developing countries where there are no standard tools for developmental screening in many settings and little or no resources for the optimal management of late complications of developmental disorders. Thus, early detection of developmental disorders is very important in such resource-­poor settings to ensure the prompt commencement of interventions. However, routine developmental screening programmes do not exist in Nigeria and many other low-­ resource settings. Objectives: This study aimed to assess the developmental characteristics of children aged 0 to 60 months and the prevalence as well as predictors of developmental delay in these children Study Design: A descriptive, cross-­sectional study.

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

10 |

ABSTRACTS

Study Participants & Setting: This study was carried out among children aged 0 to 60 months, at the Urban comprehensive health centre, Eleyele, Ile-­Ife in Osun State. The health facility provides maternal and child health services including child welfare services and immunization services. The purposive sampling method was used to recruit eligible children attending the clinic while children whose parents did not give consent were excluded. Materials/Methods: The developmental screening was conducted on all the participants using the Ages and Stages Questionnaire (ASQ)-­3. The ethical approval for the study was obtained from the Human Research and Ethics Committee of the Obafemi Awolowo University. Frequencies and percentages were used to present the prevalence of developmental delay and the developmental characteristics of the respondents. The chi-­square test of association was used to identify associated categorical factors with developmental delay at the bivariate level. Results: We studied 477 under-­5 children with a mean age of 22.1±15.9 months and a male-­to-­female ratio of 1.2:1. The prevalence of developmental delay was 10.9%. This comprised of delay in the communication domain (21;4.4%) gross motor domain (9;1.9%), fine motor domain (17;3.6%), problem-­solving domain (21;4.4%), personal-­social domain (14;2.9%). Delay across multiple domains was present in 17(32.7%) of those with developmental delay. About one-­ third (152; 32.7%) had values close to the cut-­off. The factors predictive of developmental delay were the place of delivery, previous hospital admission and the number of children within the family (p=0.033, 0.035 and 0.017 respectively). Conclusions/Significance: Routine developmental screening is very important in primary and secondary care settings to aid early intervention for developmental delay, especially in low-­resource studies. Further studies among at-­risk children, is recommended.
A9 | Early versus Late Reaching Mastery's Effect on Object Permanence in Infants with Motor Delays Receiving Start-­play and Usual Care-­early Intervention
K JANCART1, I BABIK2, A BARALDI CUNHA3, N KOZIOL4, D CHOI5, R HARBOURNE1, M LOBO3, S WESTCOTT MCCOY6, S WILLETT7, S DUSING8, J BOVAIRD5 1Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA; 2Boise State University, Boise, ID, USA; 3University of Delaware, Newark, DE, USA; 4Nebraska Center for Research on Children, Youth, Families and Schools, University of Nebraska-­ Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, USA; 5University of Nebraska-­Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, USA; 6University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA; 7Munroe-­Meyer Institute, UNMC, Omaha, NE, USA; 8University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
Background and Objective(s): Reaching is foundational for early object exploration -­a critical component to

infant cognitive development. Object permanence (OP) -­understanding that objects exist when not sensed -­ has important implications for cognitive growth. Our first objective was to show the impact of early versus late reaching mastery on OP trajectory when aggregating across severity (mild/significant delay) and START-­ Play or Usual Care-­Early Intervention (SP/UC-­EI) groups. Secondly, we aimed to elucidate if there are any differences in OP score change for severity status and treatment group between infants with early versus late reaching mastery. Study Design: A randomized controlled trial with a follow-­up. Study Participants & Setting: In this randomized controlled trial with a follow-­up, 112 infants with motor delays (baseline age 10.6±2.6 months) were recruited from 5 regions of the US. Infants entered the study when able to sit propped for at least 3 seconds. We stratified infants into mild (55.36%) or significant delay (44.64%) groups based on the Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development, 3rd Edition motor composite. 50.89% were assigned to the SP intervention, and 49.11% continued with UC-­EI only. Materials/Methods: Reaching mastery -­the assessment at which the child was able to contact a toy with either hand for 65% of the assessment time (early: 3 months post-­ baseline; late: 6 months post-­baseline) -­was measured in a supported seat and with a standardized protocol. We developed a 20-­point ordinal OP scale. Both OP and reaching were tested five times over 12 months (baseline, 1.5mos, 3mos, 6mos, and 12mos). The SP intervention focused on blending cognitive constructs within motor tasks and was provided twice weekly for 12weeks for the SP group. A series of piecewise linear mixed models were run to examine the main effect of reaching mastery on OP scores across time and its moderating effect on severity/treatment group differences. Results: For the early reaching mastery group, OP scores improved significantly during the intervention phase (p=0.003, g=0.38), post-­intervention phase (p<0.0001, g=0.59), and overall across the duration of the study (p<0.0001, g=0.96). For the late mastery group, significant improvement in OP scores was found only across the entire study period (p=0.045, g=0.37). The only difference in OP performance between mastery groups was observed in the early mastery group's steeper slope across the duration of the study (p=0.036, g=0.54). Early mastery infants in the SP group (p=0.038, g=0.61) demonstrated continuous growth, whereas the UC-­EI group showed a plateau during the post-­ intervention phase. Conclusions/Significance: Initial reaching mastery level may set children on a specific developmental trajectory of cognitive abilities, including OP, that persists over time. This stresses the need to focus early on reaching to advance cognitive abilities. SP may elicit consistent and positive growth in early cognitive skills post-­intervention in infants who are able to master reaching skills early.

ABSTRACTS
A10 | Bayley Trajectories Predict School Readiness Better Than Single Assessments in 4-­5 Year-­old Children Born Very Preterm
M NEEL1, S CONROY2, R SRINIVAS3, H TAYLOR1, A DE SILVA1, T BUSCH1, N MAITRE4 1Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA; 2Nationwide Children's Hospital; The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA; 3Ohio University Heritage College of Osteopathic Medicine, Athens, OH, USA; 4Emory University School of Medicine & Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, GA, USA
Background and Objective(s): Bayley Scales of Infant Development are most commonly used to evaluate developmental outcomes of infants born very preterm (VPT). Controversy surrounds how well early Bayley scores predict school-­age outcomes. The objective of the study was to determine if Bayley score trajectories in the first three years predict school readiness better than single tests in children born VPT at 4years. Study Design: Prospective cohort study. Study Participants & Setting: We evaluated 53 children born VPT at 4 to 5years. The participants were treated in a network of NICUs in the Midwest and cared for in the neonatal follow-­up program at the primary hospital site. Families were contacted in order of the child's age (from the oldest to youngest 4-­year-­olds) during an 11-­month recruitment period. Materials/Methods: Outcomes included the Differential Ability Scales General Conceptual Ability (DAS GCA) for cognition, Test of Preschool Early Literacy for language, & Movement Assessment Battery for Children for motor function. Predictors were Bayley (3rd ed) scores completed 1 to 5 times per child between 6 to 38 months. We used linear mixed models (LMM) with random effects for each child to extract the sum of fixed and random effects for intercepts and slopes for each participant which correspond to the initial score and change over time in Bayley scores. Next, we tested four linear models with random intercepts AND/OR random slopes of Bayley scores to predict school readiness scores at 4years. Results: For the LMM, addition of Bayley change to models with only initial score improved model fits for Bayley receptive language, expressive language, and gross motor scores (p=0.02, 0.01, <0.001). For cognitive outcomes in models containing both Bayley change AND initial score to predict readiness scores, for each 1-­point increase in the initial Bayley score, the DAS CGA score increased by 6.84 with 95% CI (5.34, 8.35) after controlling for Bayley change. For each 1-­point increase in the change in Bayley score over one year, the DAS CGA score increased by 18.1 with 95% CI (12.9, 23.3) after controlling for initial score. The model containing both Bayley change AND initial score explained 63% of the variance in DAS CGA score as compared to <1% and 26% of the variance explained by models containing either Bayley change OR initial score. For all Bayley and readiness score

 |11
pairs, models accounting for both Bayley change AND initial score had greater predictive value compared to models containing Bayley change OR initial score alone. Conclusions/Significance: Trajectories of Bayley scores predict 4-­to 5-­year outcomes better than single Bayley scores. Neurodevelopmental follow up of infants born preterm is more predictive and relevant to school readiness when children are assessed at multiple time points in the first three years. These results support others suggesting the need for follow-­up using trajectories rather than a single 2-­year-­old time point.
Free Paper Session B: Medical Complexity
B1 | Cardiometabolic Disease Risk in Children with Cerebral Palsy
T BATSON1, J LEE2, J KINDLER2, N POLLOCK3, M BARBE4, C MODLESKY5 1University of Georgia, Adams, TN, USA; 2University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA; 3Medical College of Georgia-­ Augusta University, Augusta, GA, USA; 4Temple University, Lewis Katz School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA; 5University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA
Background and Objective(s): Adults with cerebral palsy (CP) display both an increased frequency and an accelerated progression of cardiometabolic disease (CMD) compared to the general population. The purpose of this study was to determine if ambulatory children with spastic CP exhibit a higher CMD risk than typically developing children, and to examine the relationship between CMD risk and visceral adiposity. Study Design: This was a case-­control study. Study Participants & Setting: Fifty-­two children with CP (between I and III on the Gross Motor Function Classification Scale) and 41 typically developing control children aged 5 to 11years were enrolled in this study between October 2012 and May 2021. Of these participants, 30 children with CP and 30 controls matched for age, sex, and race were included in the final analysis. Both groups consisted of 22 males and 8 females, and 2 Asian, 3 Black, and 25 White participants. The study took place in clinical laboratories in academic settings. Materials/Methods: Biochemical markers of CMD risk were assessed using fasting blood samples. The blood markers included lipids, glucose, and the homeostatic model of insulin resistance (HOMA-­IR). Visceral fat mass index (VFMI) and total body fat mass index (FMI) were estimated using dual-­ energy X-­ray absorptiometry. Physical activity was assessed using two accelerometer-­based activity monitors worn on the ankle continuously for 4days (3 weekdays and 1 weekend day). Group differences were assessed using independent

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

12 |

ABSTRACTS

t-­tests for normally distributed data and Mann Whitney U tests for non-­normally distributed data. Relationships between measures of adiposity and biochemical markers of CMD risk were assessed using bivariate linear regression analysis. Results: There were no group differences in age, height, weight, or body mass index. Compared to controls, children with CP had a lower height percentile (30 ±31 vs. 50 ±30) and physical activity (1280151 ±649378 vs. 2062677 ±589832 counts/d) (both p<0.05). Children with CP had higher total cholesterol (174 ±32 vs. 154 ±22 mg/dl), low-­density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-­C; 96 ±26 vs. 78 ±18 mg/dl), non-­ high-­density lipoprotein cholesterol (non-­HDL-­C; 114 ±30 vs. 93 ±18 mg/dl), and glucose (94 ±7 vs. 90 ±8 mg/dl) than controls (all p<0.05). Two-­to-­5.5 times more children with CP were classified as having borderline-­high or high levels of total cholesterol, LDL-­C, and non-­HDL-­C (all p<0.05). Eight times more children with CP presented with pre-­diabetes (fasting glucose 100 mg/dl; p<0.05). Children with CP had higher VFMI (0.14 ±0.08 vs. 0.09 ±0.05) and FMI (5.32 ±2.72 vs. 4.03 ±1.82) (both p<0.05). VFMI was positively related to fasting glucose (r=0.429, p<0.05) and HOMA-­IR (r=0.698, p<0.001) in children with CP, but not in controls (r=0.011 and 0.256, both p>0.15). Conclusions/Significance: Children with CP demonstrate early signs of CMD including dyslipidemia and pre-­diabetes, which are related to increased visceral adiposity. Funded by the National Institutes of Health (HD090126 and HD071397)
B2 | Developing a Common Dataset for Children with Severe Neurological Impairment -­a Scoping Review of Relevant Variables
S MCCORMACK1, A COLLINS2, A MAHONY2, N ALLEN3, J BALFE4, D MCDONALD4 1CHI at Tallaght and National University of Ireland Galway, Dublin, Ireland; 2CHI at Tallaght, Dublin, Ireland; 3National University of Ireland Galway, Galway, Ireland; 4CHI at Tallaght and Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland
Background and Objective(s): Severe Neurological Impairment (SNI) describes a "group of disorders of the central nervous system which arise in childhood, resulting in motor impairment, cognitive impairment and medical complexity, and where much assistance is required in the activities of daily living" (Allen, 2020). This small but significant cohort have rarely been studied together previously and the absence of data is a barrier to meaningful planning for resource allocation into adulthood. Their diagnoses often exclude this group from other research, and without a common dataset and core outcomes little progress can be made towards research to inform and manage morbidity and identify risk to longevity. Key to advancing research on children with SNI is developing this common dataset for international collection of baseline and longitudinal data. Study Design: Scoping review.

Study Participants & Setting: Scoping review of clinical and research variables relevant to the development of a common dataset for children with Severe Neurological Impairment. Materials/Methods: The scoping review was registered on Open Science Framework (osf.io/v8t76) and the dataset project registered with the COMET initiative (www.comet-­ initiative.org/Studies/Details/1976). The PRISMA extension for scoping reviews (PRISMA-­ScR) was used as a guide. Systemic searches were conducted of the databases PubMed, Embase, CINAHL Plus and Scopus along with grey literature searching to identify datasets, elements and outcomes relevant to this population. Search terms comprised those related to children, neurodisability and medical complexity. Each term was combined with: dataset or database or minimum dataset or minimal dataset or common dataset or core outcome or outcome set or common outcome or common element or data element. Inclusion criteria: Records that involve datasets, data elements, core outcomes or registry enrollment variables, records that focus on neurological impairment and/or medical complexity and records that are relevant to children. Exclusion criteria: Records that do not involve datasets, data elements, variables or core outcomes, records that are not relevant to conditions of neurologic impairment or medical complexity and records that are not relevant to children. Results: Database searches revealed 1766 results. Once duplicates were removed, 1462 were screened for eligibility. An additional 15 records were obtained from other sources. 55 full texts were reviewed. Relevant variables were extracted from 37 records and were categorised into demographics, birth, medical and surgical histories, devices, feeding, communication, vision, hearing, movement, symptoms, growth, sleep, neuroimaging, genetic and laboratory data, school and cognition, healthcare use, participation and quality of life, and family support. A total of 187 variables were included in the dataset. Conclusions/Significance: This forms the initial dataset that will be used in establishing international consensus on a common dataset for children with SNI. This will be central to future comparative and collaborative research.
B3 | Examining the Role of Sublingual Atropine for the Treatment of Sialorrhea in Patients with Neurodevelopmental Disabilities: A Retrospective Review
K PETKUS1, A GROVES2, L GLADER3 1Nationwide Children's, Columbus, OH, USA; 2Nationwide Children's, Columbus, OH, USA; 3Nationwide Children's Hospital, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA
Background and Objective(s): Excessive drooling is common in children with neurodevelopmental disabilities (NDD) and is reported in more than half of children with cerebral palsy (CP). Complications include significant respiratory morbidity. In two small open trials, sublingual atropine (SLA) showed promise in treating sialorrhea in

ABSTRACTS
children with CP or NDD. Currently there is no established dosing and only limited evidence for efficacy, yet it is used commonly. Study Design: This single-­center retrospective chart review aims to document SLA utilization to guide further study in establishing its role in secretion management for children with NDD. Study Participants & Setting: Patients with NDD age 22years or younger treated with SLA either alone or in conjunction with other anti-­cholinergic therapies for secretion management at a free-­standing children's hospital were included. An outpatient prescription for SLA was prescribed between January 1, 2016 and June 1, 2021. Exclusion criteria included use of SLA for other indication, absence of NDD, age >22years at treatment initiation, and incomplete data. Deceased patients were not included due to unclear context of SLA administration. Materials/Methods: Electronic chart data extraction was conducted utilizing SLA prescription details and manually reviewed for inclusion eligibility. Extraction included demographics, initial and final SLA dose, frequency of administration, duration of therapy, and place in therapy relative to other anti-­cholinergic agents and more invasive treatments. Descriptive statistics were generated to summarize our findings. Results: 190 patients were identified. 149 patients met criteria for inclusion. Of these, 77 (51.7%) were male, 85 (57%) had CP, and 64 (43%) had other NDD. The average starting dose for SLA was 1.5 mg/day (range of 0.25 mg/day-­6 mg/ day), or 0.09 mg/kg/day (range of 0.01 mg/kg/day-­0.49 mg/ kg/day) adjusted for patient weight. Initial dosing frequency ranged from once daily as needed to every 4 hours scheduled, with twice daily being most commonly prescribed. 56 (32.9%) patients were prescribed SLA first line for secretion management while 71 (47.7%) patients tried glycopyrrolate first. SLA was used in conjunction with other pharmacologic therapies 60% of the time and after salivary Botox, ablation, and/or surgery in 13 (8.7%) patients. Conclusions/Significance: This study sheds light on SLA as a potential additional pharmacologic agent to treat sialorrhea in children with NDD. Indeed, it is already used for this purpose. We identify a lack of consistency regarding dosing for body weight, schedule, and place in therapy, and highlight the need for further evidence to support and guide its use. Limitations include that this is a single institution study and that side effects, adherence to therapy, and rationale for therapy cessation were not analyzed. Next steps include surveying caregivers of children treated with SLA to delineate effectiveness, tolerance, and sustainability. Ultimately, a randomized controlled trial comparing SLA to placebo is needed to determine true efficacy.

 |13
B4 | Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease in Children with Neurological Impairment: A Population-­based Retrospective Cohort Study
T DEWAN1, D JOHNSON2, B LETHEBE3, J TURNER4 1Department of Pediatrics, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada; 2Department of Pediatrics, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada; 3Cummings School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada; 4Department of Pediatrics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada
Background and Objective(s): Children with neurological impairment (NI) are at increased risk of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) and may be more susceptible to complications. Diagnosis is challenging due to communication impairments and comorbidities, such as dysphagia, that present similarly to GERD. This incurs a risk of both under and over diagnosis with detrimental effects. Prior research has reported prevalence as high as 75% in specific subpopulations, such as children presenting with vomiting. However, this does not reflect the burden of disease across the population. The objective of this study was to determine the incidence and prevalence of GERD diagnosis and treatment in children with NI at a population level. Study Design: A retrospective cohort study using health administrative data. Study Participants & Setting: This study was conducted in the province of Alberta, Canada (population 4.4 million). The study population included all children who had an International Classification of Diseases (ICD) 10 code indicating NI assigned during an inpatient encounter between Apr. 1, 2006 and Mar. 31, 2018. Materials/Methods: Various provincial databases were used to collect study variables. Primary outcome was GERD diagnosis and secondary outcome was pharmacotherapy. GERD was defined by a relevant ICD code assigned during a hospital or outpatient physician encounter or a dispensed acid-­suppressing medication. Age, gender, complex chronic conditions (CCC) and technology assistance were covariates. Total medication dispensations were collected. Descriptive statistics included means with standard deviations and counts with proportions. Univariable and multivariable Poisson regressions calculated incidence rates and rate ratios for the presence of GERD and medication treatment. Results: Among 10,309 children with NI, 2,772 (26.9%) met the GERD definition. The unadjusted incidence rate was 52.1 per 1000 person-­years (95% CI=50.2-­54.1). Increasing numbers of CCCs were associated with a higher risk of GERD. Children with four or more CCCs had an incidence almost three times that of children with no CCCs (IRR 2.7, p<0.001). A gastrostomy tube incurred a five times higher rate of GERD (IRR=5.06, p<0.001). Overall, 2486 (23.7%) of the children were treated with medications of which 1535 (61.7%) did not have a diagnosis of GERD based on ICD codes. The incidence rate was 16.9 medication dispensations per year (95% CI=16.7,17.1).

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

14 |
Conclusions/Significance: The incidence of GERD in children with NI is dramatically higher than in the general pediatric population, particularly in children with gastrostomy tubes and CCCs. These children often have more severe NI; their communication impairments and comorbidities could further complicate assessment. Medication treatment was common, prolonged and often initiated without a confirmed GERD diagnosis. Additional research is necessary to determine optimal diagnosis and treatment practices specifically in children with NI.
B5 | Identifying Factors of Family Psychosocial Risk in Cerebral Palsy
E GILLOOLY1, M SCIALLA1, A TAGGI PINTO2, C SEWELL-­ROBERTS2, A KAZAK1, M ALDERFER3, M SHRADER4 1Nemours Children's Health Delaware Valley, Wilmington, DE, USA; 2Nemours Children's Health Delaware Valley, Wilmington, DE, USA; 3Nemours Children's Hospital, Wilmington, DE, USA; 4Nemours A.I. Dupont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, DE, USA
Background and Objective(s): The psychosocial needs of families who care for a child with Cerebral Palsy (CP) are not systematically assessed in many health care settings, leading to gaps in the delivery of psychosocial care. The Psychosocial Assessment Tool (PAT) is a psychosocial risk screener that was developed in pediatric oncology and adapted for use in a variety of pediatric illness populations. Our intention is to adapt this tool for use with families of children with Cerebral Palsy (The PAT-­CP). The goal of this project was to critically evaluate the literature to identify areas of psychosocial risk in families with children with CP, and to determine how those areas intersect with the domains measured by the PAT. Study Design: Literature review. Study Participants & Setting: A critical review of the literature was conducted to identify factors (e.g., demographic, socioeconomic, diagnostic, psychosocial) associated with adjustment (e.g., child quality of life, family functioning, distress) among families of children with CP. Inclusion criteria involved research studies with children and emerging adults with CP that assessed psychosocial risk or resilience. Exclusion criteria included reviews or meta-a­ nalysis, dissertations, protocols, books or book chapters, and conference posters or abstracts. Materials/Methods: A multi-­database search of relevant empirically-­based articles from the years 2000 to 2020 related to family psychosocial risk in children with CP was conducted. Following established guidelines for systematic reviews, electronic databases were searched using terms developed by the research team in conjunction with a medical librarian to ensure a comprehensive list of all potentially relevant papers. A total of 2,127 records were identified and abstracts screened; 1,897 did not fulfill inclusion criteria. The remaining 230 records were reviewed and 126 were retained.

ABSTRACTS
Information (e.g., sample size, methodology, findings) were extracted from these 126 papers. Results: Risks identified in the reviewed literature, such as behavioral and emotional problems, medical challenges, and caregiver burnout, are consistent with items found on the PAT. Individual topics applicable to the population of children with CP that were identified as missing on the PAT included housing needs, parental employment status, caregiver pain, and transition planning. Conclusions/Significance: Results indicate that there is a need to tailor screening tools for systematic psychosocial screening in CP. The present literature review created an empirically based list of psychosocial risks and resources that will be included on the PAT-­CP. Systematic assessment of family psychosocial risks and resources, tailored to the challenges and demands associated with CP, could provide a way to screen all families in an effective and inclusive manner, identifying those that need appropriate psychosocial care.
B6 | Impact of Comorbidities on the Health-­related Quality of Life of Children with Severe Cerebral Palsy
U NARAYANAN1, V GRAD2, D FEHLINGS3, A FERKUL2, K GRAHAM4 1The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; 2Child Evaluative Sciences Program, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada; 3Holland Bloorview Kids Rehabilitation Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; 4The University of Melbourne, The Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
Background and Objective(s): Children with severe, non-­ ambulatory cerebral palsy (CP) may experience numerous comorbidities. These comorbidities have a significant impact on their health and consume significant attention and interventions to keep them under control. The aim of this study was to evaluate the impact of these comorbidities on the health-­related quality of life (HRQL) of children with severe CP. Study Design: Cross-­sectional analysis of prospective cohort. Study Participants & Setting: Parents (primary caregivers) of children (2-­19years) with severe CP (GMFCS IV & V), enrolled in an international, prospective cohort study of hip displacement (CHOP Study). Participants were included from 26 sites in 10 countries. Materials/Methods: Parents of 671 children reported on the presence and perceived severity of 17 different comorbidities or reliance on health-­technologies, and completed the Caregiver Priorities & Child Health Index of Life with Disabilities (CPCHILD) questionnaire in the language of their preference. These data were collected at inception (prior to any hip intervention) along with demographic information. Univariate and multivariate analyses were conducted to measure the association between comorbidities or

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ABSTRACTS

 |15

reliance on health technologies and HRQL as measured by the total and domain scores of the CPCHILD questionnaire. Results: Children in this cohort were 7.9 (+/-­3.7) years old (2-­18.8 yrs); 57% male; 60% GMFCS V; 72% were MACS IV or V; and 70% CFCS IV or V. 56% had a seizure disorder; 31% had GE reflux; 40% were tube-­fed; 34% had scoliosis; and 49% had contractures interfering with care. 11% had a VP shunt, 2% had a tracheostomy, and 4% an ITB pump. The mean (SD; range) CPCHILD total score was 51.2 (14.7; 1-­88). Seizure status, visual and hearing impairments, drooling, tracheostomy, pneumonia needing hospitalization, medications for reflux, method of feeding, scoliosis, hip migration percentage, pain or contractures interfering with care, and sleep disturbances were all significantly negatively correlated with the CPCHILD in the univariate analyses. In the multivariate model, seizure status, meds for reflux, respiratory health, pain and contractures interfering with care, and sleep disturbances remained significant after adjusting for age, gender, GMFCS, MACS and CFCS levels. Conclusions/Significance: Comorbidities and reliance on health technologies are negatively correlated with HRQL in children with severe CP. There is a clinical imperative for the recognition of these comorbidities and addressing them to improve the health and HRQL of these children. Moreover, any research involving this population that focuses on HRQL as an outcome, must take into account the presence and severity of these comorbidities to make appropriate inferences about HRQL outcomes. These findings provide the justification for the development of a standardized checklist to collect data on the presence and severity of comorbidities for this population, that can be used for clinical decision making as well as a comorbidity index for purposes of research.
B7 | Medication Use and Polypharmacy Trajectories Among Children with Cerebral Palsy
J PRUENTE1, D ALECIA2, D WHITNEY3 1University of Michigan, Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Ann Arbor, MI, USA; 2University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA; 3Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

(5-­18years of age) with continuous health plan enrollment for all 4years were included. The cohorts were 600 children without NDDs (CP only) and 652 children with NDDs (CP+NDDs). NDDs included children with epilepsy, autism spectrum disorder, and intellectual disability. Materials/Methods: This study included chronic and "as needed" outpatient drugs, but excluded "as needed" drugs used for the common cold, flu, allergies, and pre/ post-­operative use. The number of unique drug exposures monthly from 6 months prior to the index date through the 3years of follow-­up was analyzed using group-­based trajectory modeling (GBTM). The primary GBTM analysis examined the number of drugs (zero-­inflated Poisson model). The secondary GBTM analysis examined exposure based on <2 vs. 2 drugs (logistic model). In the context of polypharmacy, GBTM can provide estimates of how many children are chronically exposed to differing "depths" of polypharmacy. Results: For the primary model (number of drugs), GBTM identified 3 trajectory groups for CP only that remained stable over the 3.5-­year period: 69.7% were prescribed on average 0 drugs/month, 24.8% 1 drug/month, and 5.5% approximately 4 drugs/month. The GBTM identified 5 trajectory groups for CP+NDDs that remained stable over the 3.5-­year period: 22.4% received on average 0 prescriptions, 25.6% only 1 prescription, 25.2% 2 prescriptions, and in the moderate to high-­user category 18.4% and 8.4% were prescribed an average of 4 and 6 drugs respectively. For the secondary model for pediatric polypharmacy (<2 vs. 2 drugs), GBTM identified 3 and 5 trajectory groups for CP only and CP+NDD cohorts, respectively: the main finding was that 1 in 5 from the CP only cohort was consistently exposed to polypharmacy over the follow-­up, while the proportion was 3 in 5 children from the CP+NDDs cohort. Age was weakly associated with trajectory groups for CP only and not associated for CP+NDDs. Conclusions/Significance: This study provides novel clinical information about the individual-­level chronicity (over 3.5years) of polypharmacy exposure among children with CP with and without NDDs. While more work is needed, findings may inform future clinical work into optimizing poly-­pharmaceutical therapies for children with CP.

Background and Objective(s): Children with cerebral palsy may experience polypharmacy (concurrent use of >=2 drugs) due to abnormal tone and frequent medical comorbidities. Despite the potential risks, there is little research regarding polypharmacy in children with developmental disabilities. The objective was to identify trajectories of individual-­level polypharmacy exposure at monthly intervals spanning 3.5years among children with CP with and without co-­ occurring neurodevelopmental disabilities (NDDs). Study Design: Retrospective cohort study. Study Participants & Setting: This study leveraged patient-­ level claims from 01/01/2015-­12/31/2018 from Optum's de-­identified Clinformatics® Data Mart Database that has representation across the U.S. School-­aged children with CP

B8 | Parent and Nurse Perspectives on Promoting Successful Partnerships for Children with Ventilator Dependence
S SOBOTKA1, E LYNCH1, D HOFFMAN2, K WHITMORE3 1University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA; 2University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA; 3Marquette University, Sun Prairie, WI, USA
Background and Objective(s): Children with home mechanical ventilation (HMV) require the support of skilled nursing in order to live at home. Families and home health

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

16 |

ABSTRACTS

nurses must establish successful working partnerships in intimate family homes for children to flourish. Although challenges have been described, to our knowledge no prior study has combined nurse and family perspectives on the key components to creating successful partnerships. Our objective was to understand the key components of establishing and maintaining successful partnerships when working in the home to support children with HMV from the perspective of both home health nurses and parents of children with HMV. Study Design: Qualitative research via semi-­structured individual interviews. Analysis used a modified-­template approach and discussed to consensus agreement. Study Participants & Setting: Home health nurses with experience caring for children with IMV were recruited through a state-­wide Title V program and subsequent snowball sampling. Families of children with HMV that were going home from the hospital for the first time with HMV were recruited through a state-­wide Title V program that provides care coordination to children with medical complexity. Materials/Methods: Semi-­structured interviews were conducted with 15 home health nurses and 20 parents of children with HMV in Illinois over zoom teleconferencing or in a family home. The analysis used a modified-­template approach and themes were discussed to consensus agreement. Results: Twenty mothers and 10 fathers of children with HMV were interviewed; children were 30% Non-­Hispanic White, 40% Non-­Hispanic Black, and 25% Hispanic. All children had ventilators and feeding tubes; 65% of children were born prematurely and 35% had a congenital heart defect. Nurses were 67% Non-­Hispanic, 20% Non-­Hispanic Black, and 13% Hispanic or Multi-­race. The majority (60%) of nurses worked full time with an average (range) of 14 (1-­ 36) years of experience. Parents valued a positive, often intimate, relationship with the nurses via open communication and competent care for their child. In a few cases, families indicated that negative experiences contributed to wariness with new nurses. Nurses described stress during initial hospital-­to-­home transition and initial engagement, but identified that mutual respect for each other's expertise and role is crucial. They acknowledged that some nurse-­family pairings are not successful. Meaningful engagement with patients and long-­term relationships with families, sometimes beyond the employment period, were highly rewarding to nurses. Conclusions/Significance: Home health nurses and parents of children with HMV both value meaningful relationships within professional boundaries. Initial engagement can be challenged by increased parental stress and wariness of new care providers, which sometimes can be interpreted as lack of trust in professional autonomy. Nursing agencies may be poised to support partnerships and mutual understanding of both parents' and nurses' experiences through facilitated communication.

B9 | Reduction of Emergency Room Utilization for Children with Medical Complexity and Dehydration-­ related Illness -­Use of "Interventions for Complex Kids You Can Do at Home" (ICKY) Plans
E HOOPER1, J ALLMON1, K CARTER1, K SOBUSH2 1SSM Health Cardinal Glennon Children's Hospital, St. Louis, MO, USA; 2Saint Louis University School of Medicine, SSM Health Cardinal Glennon Children's Hospital, St. Louis, MO, USA
Background and Objective(s): Children with medical complexity (CMC) utilize extensive healthcare resources involving multiple subspecialty services and often require frequent and prolonged hospitalizations with high emergency room utilization. Dehydration-­related illnesses are common in CMC. With prompt and effective outpatient management, emergent care needs for dehydration-­related illnesses can be avoided. The optimal outpatient strategy to deliver hydration-­based care to a population of CMC is not known. The objectives of this study are to identify best practices for programmatic management of CMC with dehydration-­ related illnesses by maintaining hydration at home through the safe delivery of a sick plan called "Interventions for Complex Kids You Can Do at Home" (ICKY) plan. Study Design: An interventional study utilizing the ICKY plan was designed to evaluate CMC with dehydration-­related illnesses that were enrolled in a multidisciplinary complex medical care program. The ICKY plan was implemented into standard nursing practice that included utilization of scripted telephone triage to assess level of dehydration and to determine if further evaluation in person was needed for safety. An algorithm was developed to guide dehydration management at home if determined to be safe with implementation of individualized ICKY plans that adjusted feeding plans to include oral rehydration therapy. Family caregivers were also educated to identify early signs of dehydration at home to initiate their ICKY plan. The study was a case series that assessed the impact of the ICKY plan intervention over time on emergency room utilization for dehydration-­related illnesses. Study Participants & Setting: Participants included CMC enrolled in the Complex Medical Care Program at SSM Health Children's Hospital in St. Louis, Missouri, USA. The outpatient multidisciplinary program focuses on sick planning and coordination of care intended for children with high subspecialty care needs and/or high inpatient hospital utilization. Materials/Methods: ICKY plan implementation was in the fall of 2019 and provided to all CMC enrolled in the Complex Medical Care Program that were at risk of dehydration. 103 total emergency department visits for dehydration-­related illnesses for CMC were evaluated over an 18-­month time period in 2019 to 2020 in 6-­month cohorts. Results: Sequential 6-­month cohorts of patients showed a reduction in emergency room visits for dehydration-­related illnesses per total enrolled CMCP patients with 15.9% in the

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ABSTRACTS

 |17

6 months prior to ICKY plan implementation, 13.1% during the 6 months of ICKY plan implementation, and 7.9% in the 6 months following ICKY plan implementation. Conclusions/Significance: Research is limited on home management of dehydration in CMC. Standardized sick plan protocols like the ICKY plan for the management of mild to moderate dehydration can be implemented for CMC. The favorable programmatic reduction in emergency room visits for dehydration-­related illnesses following implementation of a standardized approach warrants further research.
B10 | The Development and Sensibility Evaluation of the CPCHECKList©-­a Comorbidity Index for Severe Cerebral Palsy
U NARAYANAN1, V GRAD2, L GLADER3, D FEHLINGS4, P GROSS5, A FERKUL2 1The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; 2Child Evaluative Sciences Program, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada; 3Nationwide Children's Hospital, The Ohio State University, Boston, MA, USA; 4Holland Bloorview Kids Rehabilitation Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; 5University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA
Background and Objective(s): Comorbidities are common among children with severe cerebral palsy (CP) and have been shown to be negatively associated with their health-­ related quality of life (HRQL). Parents seek the attention of healthcare professionals (HCPs) from multiple disciplines to address these comorbidities. The aims of this study are to describe the development and evaluation of the sensibility (face and content validity) of the CPCHECKList, a parent-­ reported comorbidity index for children with severe CP, that captures the presence and severity of these comorbidities, and whether they wish to have these addressed. Study Design: Decision support tool development. Cross-­ sectional analysis of prospective cohort & survey. Study Participants & Setting: (1) An international prospective cohort of children with non-­ambulatory CP (GMFCS IV and V). (2) A purposeful international sample of HCPs across multiple disciplines involved in the care of children and adults with severe CP. Materials/Methods: The initial CPCHECKlist was derived from a list of comorbidities captured in a prospective international cohort of the CP Hip Outcomes Project (CHOP) (n=740), and shown to be negatively correlated with HRQL, as measured by the CPCHILD questionnaire. These were incorporated into a two-­part parent/caregiver report of the presence and severity of 22 comorbidities; and the use of/ challenges with 9 health technologies. HCPs (n=204) were invited to complete a REDCap survey to evaluate the sensibility (face and content validity) of the CPCHECKList. They rated each item to accept as is; accept with modifications; or reject; and completed a 12-­item sensibility questionnaire (Rowe and Oxman) to evaluate the instructions, and content

for relevance, completeness, redundancy, usability, clinical and research utility, using a 7-­point Likert scale. Results: The CPCHECKList included comorbidities related to seizure, sleep, vision, hearing, oral, pulmonary, gastro-­ intestinal, nutritional, genito-­urinary, musculoskeletal health and pain. Parents report the presence and severity of each, and their goal to have each addressed. 101/204 (49.5%) HCPs responded with a mean of 79% "accept as is" responses (65%-­94%) for all items. Based on input from HCPs, 16 items or their response options were altered; and 3 items added. Instructions, order and formatting were refined to improve clarity. All 12 items in the sensibility questionnaire scored 4/7. Conclusions/Significance: HCPs found the CPCHECKList to be a sensible index of comorbidities and health-­ technologies relevant to children with severe CP, and an efficient way for parents to communicate health concerns. HCP's suggestions led to some modifications. The CPCHECKList must next be evaluated for its utility and usability by parents; followed by its validation in actual clinical practice to evaluate its intended impact on treatment decisions and shared decision making. This tool might help parents highlight for HCPs, heath concerns that require attention, while serving as a comorbidity index to capture the health of a child with severe CP for purposes of research.
Free Paper Session C: Pathophysiology and Neuroplasticity
C1 | Persons with Cerebral Palsy with Less Sensorimotor Cortical Flexibility Might Be More Susceptible to Distracting Visual Stimuli
M BUSBOOM1, R HOFFMAN2, R SPOONER3, B TAYLOR4, S BAKER4, M TREVARROW1, T WILSON5, M KURZ5 1Boys Town National Research Hospital, Omaha, NE, USA; 2Department of Physical Therapy, Creighton University, Omaha, NE, USA; 3Institute for Human Neuroscience, Boys Town National Research Hospital, Omaha, NE, USA; 4Institute for Human Neuroscience, Boys Town National Research Hospital, Omaha, NE, USA; 5Institute for Human Neuroscience, Boys Town National Research Hospital, Boys Town, NE, USA
Background and Objective(s): Visual selective attention involves focusing on a target stimulus while disregarding distracting or unrelated visual stimuli. Our prior magnetoencephalographic (MEG) brain imaging experimental work has highlighted that the visual selective attention networks are likely disturbed in persons with cerebral palsy (CP). However, whether this increased susceptibility to distracting stimuli also impacts activity within key motor-­related cortical networks in those with CP is not well

18 |
established. We hypothesized that greater change (i.e., flexibility) in sensorimotor cortical activity would be necessary to suppress the cognitive interference created by the distracting visual stimuli in order to maximize the execution of the motor command. Study Design: Cohort. Study Participants & Setting: A cohort of persons with CP (n=38; Age=24.1 ±10.6 yrs; MACS I-­III; GMFCS I-­III) and NT controls (n=47; Age=21.6 ±9.9 yrs) were recruited to participate in a MEG study conducted at a research medical center. Materials/Methods: During MEG recordings, participants viewed a series of flanking arrows that were either congruent (i.e., same direction) or incongruent (i.e., opposite direction) relative to the middle target arrow. Participants pressed a button to signify the direction of the target arrow. We imaged the sensorimotor beta (18-­26 Hz) and gamma (70-­80 Hz) oscillatory activity that are critical to the planning and execution of motor commands. Structural equation modeling (SEM) was subsequently utilized to probe the multivariate relationships between the changes (i.e., incongruent -­congruent) in the strength of the beta and gamma cortical activity and the reaction times. Results: SEM indicated that for the NT controls (b=0.18, p=0.045) and persons with CP (b=0.73, p<0.001), a greater change in the strength of the beta oscillations when the visual distractors were present was more likely to produce reaction times that were similar to the congruent condition. However, this relationship was more prominent for the persons with CP (p=0.014). The SEM also indicated that for the persons with CP, a greater change in the strength of the gamma oscillations (b=-­0.45, p=0.006) when the visual distractors were presented was more likely to result in a reaction time that was similar to the congruent condition. Conclusions/Significance: Prior studies have shown that flanker interference modulates the execution of the motor command and the underlying cortical oscillatory activity in healthy adults. Potentially, adults with CP that lack flexibility in altering the activity of the sensorimotor neural generators might be more susceptible to the effects of distracting visual stimuli on their motor actions. We contend that measuring the cortical flexibility responses to cognitive and environmental demands may provide critical new metrics for understanding the possible neural underpinnings of aberrant motor actions in persons with CP, as well as a new class of therapeutic targets.
C2 | Altered Cortical Oscillations During Visuomotor Integration in Children with Hemiplegic Cerebral Palsy
Y SONG1, E BROCK2, S CONRAD2, S ALLAHABADI3, S ACORD4, Y JOHNSON5, W MARKS6, C PAPADELIS7 1Cook Children's Health Care System, University of Texas at Arlington, Fort Worth, TX, USA; 2Cook Children's Health Care System, Fort Worth, TX, USA; 3Texas Christian University School of Medicine, Fort Worth, TX, USA; 4Cook

ABSTRACTS
Children's Health Care System, Fort Worth, TX, USA; 5Cook Children's Health Care System, Texas Christian University School of Medicine, Fort Worth, TX, USA; 6Cook Children's Medical Center, University of North Texas Dept of Pediatrics, Fort Worth, TX, USA; 7Cook Children's Health Care System, University of Texas at Arlington, Texas Christian University School of Medicine, Fort Worth, TX, USA
Background and Objective(s): A common deficit in children with hemiplegic cerebral palsy (HCP) is abnormal upper limb motor functioning. Although musculoskeletal impairments are seen in most of these children, musculoskeletal deformations may not be the sole reason for their motor aberrations. Alterations in brain activity likely contribute to motor deficits in children with HCP. A handful of previous studies have examined these altered brain activity but mostly focused on lower extremities. The cortical oscillation abnormalities associated with upper limb motor impairments in children with HCP remains poorly characterized. Here, we aim to assess possible alterations in the cortical oscillations of children with HCP during a visuomotor integration task using a unique experimental setup that integrates brain imaging with magnetoencephalography (MEG) and high-­density electroencephalogram (HD-­EEG). Study Design: Prospective cohort study. Study Participants & Setting: Six children with spastic HCP (six males; mean age: 12.3±2.2years) and ten age-­matched typically developing (TD) children (six males; mean age: 11.5±1.7years) participated in this study. Materials/Methods: We recorded simultaneous 256-­channels HD-­EEG and 306-­sensors MEG recordings while participants were performing a visuomotor integration task. Participants were instructed to tap their left index after a cartoon cat image presented and to tap their right index after a cartoon dog image presented (Go trials), and not to tap when a red-­light bulb image followed the cat or dog image (NoGo trials). Go and NoGo trials were pseudorandomly scattered (75% Go and 25% NoGo trials). MEG and HD-­EEG data analysis was performed with Brainstorm. Recordings were firstly filtered (band-­pass: 1-­100 Hz; notch: 60 Hz), then epoched into trials time-­locked to the visual­Go cues and tapping onset as detected from electromyography (EMG) that was collected at the first dorsal interosseous muscle of both hands. Cortical source waveforms were reconstructed with dynamic Statistical Parametric Mapping (dSPM) source inversion to individual specific boundary element model. Event-­related desynchronization (ERD) and synchronization (ERS) in alpha (8-­13 Hz) and beta (14-­30 Hz) frequency bands were assessed at sensor level, then localized to cortex by computing whole cortex activity time-­ frequency maps. Results: Sensor level time-­frequency analysis showed that children with HCP had weaker alpha and beta ERD (p<0.05) and ERS (p<0.05) than TD children. Source localization of alpha beta ERD and ERS revealed that cortical oscillation differences between children with HCP and TD children

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ABSTRACTS
mainly exist in the sensorimotor cortex, superior parietal cortex, V1 and V5 visual areas. Conclusions/Significance: Our findings of alterations of alpha and beta ERS and ERD associated with visually-­cued finger tapping in children with HCP indicate potential abnormalities in planning hand motor actions and resetting cortical motor network in these children.
C3 | Visual Attention in Cerebral Visual Impairment: Relationship with Visual Attention Neural Networks
C BAUER1, Z PAMIR2, C MANLEY3, M DROTTAR4, P BEX5, L MERABET1 1Massachusetts Eye and Ear, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; 2Mass Eye and Ear, Harvard Medical School, USA; 3Massachusetts Eye and Ear, Harvard Medical School, Brighton, MA, USA; 4Massachusetts Eye and Ear, Boston, MA, USA; 5Department of Psychology, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA
Background and Objective(s): Individuals with cerebral visual impairment (CVI) often report challenges with visual search and attention, particularly in complex visual environments. The extent to which these are impacted in individuals with CVI is unclear, as are the neural correlates of these potential challenges. This study evaluates the link between functional connectivity of the dorsal and ventral attention networks, reports of visual attention difficulty, and performance on a visual search task in individuals with CVI. Study Design: This is a two-­group cross-­sectional research study. Study Participants & Setting: Sixteen (9 CVI, age = 20.5years ±5.5, 7 control, age = 25.5years ±4.5) participants were enrolled. Materials/Methods: Participants with CVI completed the CVI Questionnaire. Positive responses in the visual attention domain were summed. Visual search was assessed using a conjunction search paradigm. Targets and distractors were combinations of white or black "C"s and "O"s on a mean luminance grey background. The search display was constructed by randomly plotting all search items within a viewing angle of 13.5°. Set sizes of 1, 4, 8, 16, and 32 elements were randomly interleaved with 10 trials per condition, for a total of 50 trials per run. Response times were recorded as the interval between trial start and response. Fourteen of the participants (7 CVI, 7 control) underwent MRI scanning on a 3T Philips Elition X. T1w, two rsfMRI, and fieldmaps were acquired. Data was analyzed with the CONN functional connectivity toolbox using default data preprocessing pipeline settings, including motion correction, spatial smoothing, segmentation, and normalization to MNI space. Brain regions implicated with the dorsal and ventral attention networks were defined as regions of interest. A multivariate parametric GLM analysis with FDR correction was used to evaluate correlations in rsfMRI signal between seed regions.

 |19
Results: All participants with CVI reported challenges with visual attention domain from the CVI Questionnaire (mean 4.33 ±1.73 SD, range 2 6 out of 9 possible responses). In the conjunction search task, the CVI group (3.20 ±2.36 s) had a longer average reaction time compared to controls (1.26 ±0.28 s: t[10.22]= -­2.71, p=0.02), which was particularly evident at the larger set sizes as indicated by the increased slope (CVI = 0.88 ±0.15, control = 0.024 ±0.02). Patterns of reduced functional connectivity were observed in the CVI group between early visual, dorsal attention, and ventral attention networks, which corresponded to performance on the conjunction search task and the CVI Questionnaire. Conclusions/Significance: These results provide empirical support for the challenges with visual search and visual attention that are commonly reported in individuals with CVI. The intra-­and inter-­network functional connectivity data suggest that impaired visual attention may be due in part to aberrant communication between associated brain regions.
C4 | Somatosensory Functional Network Abnormalities in Children with Hemiplegic Cerebral Palsy
Y SONG1, S CONRAD2, E BROCK2, A SHIERK3, S ACORD4, Y JOHNSON5, W MARKS6, C PAPADELIS7 1Cook Children's Health Care System, University of Texas at Arlington, Fort Worth, TX, USA; 2Cook Children's Health Care System, Fort Worth, TX, USA; 3Texas Woman's University, Scottish Rite for Children, Dallas, TX, USA; 4Cook Children's Health Care System, Fort Worth, TX, USA; 5Cook Children's Health Care System, Texas Christian University School of Medicine, Fort Worth, TX, USA; 6Cook Children's Medical Center, University of North Texas Dept of Pediatrics, Fort Worth, TX, USA; 7Cook Children's Health Care System, University of Texas at Arlington, Texas Christian University School of Medicine, Fort Worth, TX, USA
Background and Objective(s): Children with hemiplegic cerebral palsy (HCP) often show somatosensory deficits in their upper extremities. Previous neurophysiological studies that examined the neural correlates of these deficiencies show evidence of neuroplasticity in the primary somatosensory cortex. Yet, it is still largely unknown about the extent of the functional deficits in the entire neural network involved in somatosensory processing of children with HCP. Here, we examine the spatiotemporal neural correlates of somatosensory functional deficits in children with HCP with a unique experimental setup that integrates simultaneous brain imaging with magnetoencephalography (MEG) and high-­density electroencephalogram (HD-­EEG). Study Design: Prospective cohort study. Study Participants & Setting: Eight children with spastic HCP (three females; mean age: 10±3.8years) and thirteen

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

20 |

ABSTRACTS

age-­matched typically developing (TD) children (six females; mean age: 9±2.7years) participated in this study. Materials/Methods: We performed simultaneous 256-­channels HD-­EEG and 306-­sensors MEG recordings while participants were receiving pneumatic stimulation of three digits (i.e., thumb, middle-­finger, and pinky) of both hands following a pseudorandom order. MEG and HD-­ EEG data were preprocessed with Brainstorm. Recordings were band pass (1-­100Hz) and notch (60Hz) filtered, then segmented into trials time-­locked to stimulation onset. To localize cortical sources of pneumatic stimulation evoked responses, we reconstructed cortical source waveforms by applying dynamic Statistical Parametric Mapping (dSPM) source inversion to individual specific boundary element model. Cortical activations, somatosensory time-­frequency maps and functional connectivity were compared between children with HCP and TD children with independent-­ samples permutation t tests. Results: Early cortical somatosensory processing centered the contralateral primary somatosensory cortex (S1) in TD children. In contrast, children with HCP showed weaker activation in the contralateral S1 but stronger activations at pre-­central gyrus (p<0.05). Time-­frequency analysis of waveforms extracted from contralateral S1 areas in children with HCP and TD reveals power differences on beta (14-­ 30Hz) and low gamma (30-­50Hz) within 100ms between children with HCP and TD children (p<0.05). Functional connectivity analysis shows that children with HCP and TD children had phase synchrony differences mainly between contralateral S1 an S2 areas and also between ipsilateral S1 and S2 areas (p<0.05). Conclusions/Significance: Our results reflect the disruption of cortical somatosensory functional network in children with HCP in multiple aspects including cortical activation, time-­frequency decomposition, and functional connectivity. The findings are meaningful for future investigations that target to remodel cortical areas by means such as brain stimulation to restore somatosensory functions in children with HCP.
C5 | Motor Practice Related Change in the Cortices of Persons with Cerebral Palsy
M KURZ1, S BAKER2, B TAYLOR2, B CORR3, T WILSON1 1Institute for Human Neuroscience, Boys Town National Research Hospital, Boys Town, NE, USA; 2Institute for Human Neuroscience, Boys Town National Research Hospital, Omaha, NE, USA; 3Boys Town National Research Hospital, Boys Town, NE, USA

the practice dependent behavioral improvements seen after physical therapy. The objective of this investigation was to evaluate how changes in the cortical oscillations of persons with CP influence the final motor performance after practicing a simple leg target matching task. Study Design: Cohort. Study Participants & Setting: A cohort of persons with CP (n=25; Age=15.2 ±4.5 yrs; GMFCS I-­III) and neurotypical (NT) controls (n=18; Age=14.6 ±3.1 yrs) were recruited to participate in a MEG study conducted at a medical research center. Materials/Methods: MEG was used to quantify the cortical oscillations serving performance of an isometric knee extension force-­matching task. Each participant completed three separate blocks for a total of 340 practice trials. MEG and behavioral performance data were collected during the first and last practice blocks. We imaged the beta (16-­22 Hz) and gamma (66-­82 Hz) oscillatory activity that are central to the planning and execution of the motor command. Structural equation modeling (SEM) was subsequently utilized to probe the multivariate relationships between changes (i.e., Post -­ Pre) in the strength of cortical activity and the post-­practice behavioral performance enhancements (i.e., reaction time, target overshoot, time to match target). Results: Our MEG data showed there was a beta event-­related decrease (ERD; power reduction) in the sensorimotor, parietal and occipital cortical areas while planning and executing the leg motor action. Additionally, there was a gamma event-­related synchronization (ERS; power increase) in the sensorimotor cortices that was yoked to motor execution. SEMs indicated that for the NT controls, a greater change in the strength of the sensorimotor (b=-­2.263; p=0.024) and occipital (b=-­2.031; p=0.042) beta ERD after practice was predictive of faster reaction times. For the persons with CP, the SEMs indicated that a greater change in the strength of the sensorimotor gamma ERS after practice was predictive of a reduction in target overshoot (b=-­3.017; p=0.003) and faster target matching (b=-­2.964; p=0.003). Conclusions/Significance: The brain imaging literature shows the gamma ERS represents the execution of the motor command, while the beta ERD relates to motor planning. Our models suggest that for persons with CP, practicing a leg motor action has more of an immediate effect on the execution of the motor action than on planning. Furthermore, these data suggest that those with less of a gamma ERS practice effect have less performance improvements. These results hold major implications for understanding the neurophysiological mechanisms that underlie the clinical improvements seen after physical therapy.

Background and Objective(s): Our magnetoencephalographic (MEG) brain imaging research has shown that aberrations in the sensorimotor cortical oscillations of persons with cerebral palsy (CP) are linked with the precision of their lower extremity motor performance. However, it is still unclear how these cortical anomalies might impact

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ABSTRACTS

 |21

C6 | Neuroimmunomodulation in Infant Rats Restores Gait in a Model of Cerebral Palsy
L JANTZIE1, J SCAFIDI2, A HOON3, E CHIN3, V BURTON2, G GERNER2, S ROBINSON4 1Johns Hopkins University, Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, MD, USA; 2Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, MD, USA; 3Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, MD, USA; 4Johns Hopkins University, Owings Mills, MD, USA
Background and Objective(s): Many children are diagnosed with cerebral palsy (CP) after the newborn period when they are no longer eligible for perinatal interventions. Oral pharmacologic treatment to restore motor skills in infants is urgently needed. Given the chronic inflammatory phenotype present in children with CP, we hypothesized that neuroimmunomodulation could suppress neuroinflammation, restore neurodevelopment after injury, and improve gait. Based on prior work, we chose to test cocktail therapy with roxadustat (ROX), a member of a new class of oral prolyl hydroxylase domain inhibitors plus high dose melatonin (MLT) in infant (postnatal day 10, P10-­P19) or child (P21-­ P30) equivalent rats with gait deficits reminiscent of CP. Study Design: Preclinical. Study Participants & Setting: Laboratory. Materials/Methods: Preterm brain injury (PBI) from chorioamnionitis was induced in rats on embryonic day 18 via abdominal laparotomy, transient uterine artery occlusion and intra-­amniotic lipopolysaccharide injection. Shams had only laparotomy. On P10 or P21, pups of both sexes with PBI from 5 litters were randomly allocated to vehicle or cocktail treatment (ROX+MLT, intraperitoneal) for 10days. Digital treadmill analysis was performed on P35. Mean ± SEM are reported. Normality was tested with Shapiro-­Wilk test. Data were compared with two-­way ANOVA with Tukey's post hoc correction with p<0.05 significant. Results: Rats with preterm brain injury exhibited gait metrics reminiscent of children with CP, while those treated with the ROX+MLT cocktail during infancy showed restoration of gait metrics that were similar to shams (n=14). Specifically, vehicle-­treated rats with PBI (n=24) had shorter stride length (9.5±.3 vs 11.1±.3 cm, p=0.01), stride duration (0.24±.04 vs 0.28±0.006 sec, p=0.01) and higher stride frequency (4.5±.2 vs 3.7±.08 steps/sec, p=0.014) than ROX+MLT-­treated littermates (n=12). Likewise, paw placement positioning in vehicle-­treated rats with PBI (0.61±0.06 cm) was abnormal compared to shams (0.44±.06, p=0.02) and to ROX+MLT-­ treated peers (0.33±.03, p=0.002). Similar trends were present in rats treated with ROX+MLT at an older age (P21-­P30), but improvement was less profound, consistent with the well-­ known greater potential for neurological recovery in infancy compared to childhood. Conclusions/Significance: The chronic inflammatory state present in infants and children with CP may suppress spontaneous neurological recovery during development. Neuroimmunomodulation with an oral cocktail during early childhood provides a clinically viable therapeutic strategy to

treat those diagnosed as infants and toddlers with CP as part of a comprehensive rehabilitation program.
C7 | Cerebral Palsy Phenotypes Associated with Genetic Forms of Epilepsy
S SRIVASTAVA, H KOH, L SMITH, A PODURI Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
Background and Objective(s): There are well known connection between genetic causes of epilepsies and various neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) such as intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorder. However, the connection between genetic forms of epilepsy and cerebral palsy (CP) is not well characterized. To address this gap in knowledge, we performed a retrospective chart review of the motor phenotype of a cohort of patients with genetic causes of epilepsy. We hypothesized that a large percentage of the cohort will have non-p­ rogressive motor disability consistent with the definition of CP. Study Design: The study design was a retrospective case series. Study Participants & Setting: Patients were part of a research exome sequencing effort to identify genetic causes of epilepsy. Materials/Methods: We analyzed data from the first 74 individuals with a pathogenic/likely pathogenic (P/LP) variant underlying their epilepsy. We determined motor phenotype of individuals in the cohort through a retrospective chart review. We reviewed the latest in-­person clinical visit note by neurology/epilepsy and/or physiatry. We searched for references to muscle tone and motor functioning. We denoted the following CP subtypes: spastic diplegic CP, spastic quadriplegic CP, spastic hemiplegic CP, dyskinetic CP, hypotonic-­ ataxic CP. Of note, these designations are possible CP, because through this retrospective chart review, we could not fully ascertain (1) age of onset of motor impairment and (2) whether motor disturbance was non-­progressive or not. Results: There were n=74 in the cohort (mean age of 12.3 [8] years; 47% were female). These 74 individuals had P/LP variants in 57 unique genes. 19% of the cohort (n=14/74) had CP, including 8% (n=6) with hypotonic-­ataxic CP, 5% with spastic quadriplegic CP (n=4), 4% (n=3) with spastic diplegic CP, and 1% (n=1) with hemiplegic CP. The presence of CP was not correlated with period of seizure onset (neonatal, infantile, preschool, school-­aged, adolescent) (p=1.0). There was a trend for presence of CP with epilepsy type as a categorical variable (focal, generalized, combined) (p=0.06); 50% of the CP group (n=7/14) had combined epilepsy in contrast to 18% of the non-­CP group (11/60) (p=0.03). There was a trend for presence of CP with whether seizures were controlled by medication (86% in the CP group [n=12/14] vs 60% [n=36/60] in the non-­CP group) (p=0.11). Conclusions/Significance: A significant percentage of genetic forms of epilepsy may be associated with CP phenotypes, an association which is under-­characterized in the

22 |
literature. Detailed motor phenotyping is needed to fully ascertain the prevalence of CP and its subtypes among different genetic causes of epilepsy.
C8 | Clinical Actionability of Genetic Findings in Cerebral Palsy
S LEWIS1, M CHOPRA2, B ARAVAMUTHAN3, N HAQUE4, H MAY5, J BAIN6, J COHEN7, M ZECH8, D FEHLINGS9, R WINTLE10, R SEGEL11, J CARMEL12, S SRIVASTAVA13, M FAHEY14, M KRUER15 1University of Arizona, College of Medicine, Phoenix, AZ, USA; 2Rosamund Stone Zander Translational Neuroscience Center, Department of Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital, MA, USA; 3Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA; 4Department of Child Health, University of Arizona, Phoenix, AZ; Barrow Neurological Institute at Phoenix Children's Hospital, Chandler, AZ, USA; 5Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, USA; 6Columbia University, New York, NY, USA; 7Kennedy Krieger Institute, Johns, Baltimore, MD, USA; 8Institute of Neurogenomics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Germany, and Institute of Human Genetics, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany; 9Holland Bloorview Kids Rehabilitation Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; 10The Hospital for Sick Children, CP-­NET, Toronto, ON, Canada; 11Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Faculty of Medicine, Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel; 12Weinberg Family Cerebral Palsy Center, Depts of Neurology and Orthopedics, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA; 13Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA; 14Monash Children's Hospital, Monash Health, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; 15Department of Child Health, University of Arizona, Barrow Neurological Institute at Phoenix Children's Hospital, Phoenix, AZ, USA
Background and Objective(s): Single gene variants are increasingly recognized as a cause of cerebral palsy (CP), although the potential clinical actionability of these findings is less well explored. We sought to establish a framework for assessing how identification of a monogenic disorder can prompt changes to clinical care in CP. Study Design: We performed a systematic review of genes from a consecutive sample of CP patients. Study Participants & Setting: We established a working group of genetic counselors, neurologists, developmental pediatricians, and clinical and research geneticists. We reviewed data from published cohorts of patients diagnosed with CP who had undergone exome sequencing (ES) as part of research studies (n=496) or ongoing clinical care (n=1345). We determined whether individual cases harbored a pathogenic/likely pathogenic variant in a gene from the GeneDx CP curated gene panel, following ACMG guidelines and best practices. 500/1841 patients (27.2%) had an identified genetic etiology.

ABSTRACTS
Materials/Methods: Our primary outcome was the proportion of genes and patients for whom a genetic finding would change clinical management based on prevention or treatment identified in a systematic literature review. Secondary outcomes included the anticipated utility of the change in care as rated using an adapted ClinGen actionability framework. This rates the anticipated utility of the change in care on a 0 to 3 scale for potential outcome severity, intervention efficacy, and intervention safety. To determine the level of evidence supporting the recommended change in management, we performed a systematic literature using PubMed, GeneReviews, MasterMind, and RxGenes. We supplemented this search with clinicaltrials.gov to assess treatments in clinical trials as a separate category. Family planning implications were not considered. Results: We assessed clinical actionability for 244 CP-­ associated genes and found currently available interventions for 59 (24.2%) and interventions under development for another 11 (4.5%). The proportion of actionable genes was similar for research and clinical cohorts (chi-­square; ns). Evidence was limited to single patient or small cohort clinical reports for 35 genes (59%). We identified that monogenic causes of CP may directly alter clinical management for 30% of patients with a genetic etiology. This represented 153/1841 of patients (8.3%), with another 22 having treatments under development. Conclusions/Significance: We identified 59 clinically actionable genes impacting 8.3% of CP patients receiving ES. Treatments are under evaluation for 11 of the genes currently considered "non-­actionable". Additional research is needed to improve the rigor of evidence supporting such interventions. Further study of variants that do not have treatments currently may yield targeted therapy in the future. The relatively high clinical actionability rates of genomic testing results in people with CP suggest that genetic testing should be strongly considered as part of the CP diagnostic evaluation to catch treatment opportunities for improving patient care.
C9 | Gait Deficits Secondary to Prenatal Opioid Exposure Can Be Repaired with Erythropoietin and Melatonin: Implications for Cerebral Palsy and Neurorepair
N MADURAI1, Y KITASE1, S ROBINSON2, L JANTZIE3 1Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA; 2Johns Hopkins University, Owings Mills, MD, USA; 3Johns Hopkins University, Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, MD, USA
Background and Objective(s): The opioid crisis is a public health emergency, and the incidence of substance misuse during pregnancy and its negative impact on postnatal outcomes is a critical threat to pediatric and adult health. Accordingly, there is an urgent need to define the full spectrum of adverse outcomes associated with Prenatal Opioid Exposure (POE), including cerebral palsy. Indeed, the effects

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ABSTRACTS
of POE on neurodevelopment extend far beyond the symptoms of Neonatal Opioid Withdrawal Syndrome (NOWS), and include preterm birth, motor, and cognitive deficits. Here, we examined the effect of POE on gait throughout development and evaluated the treatment potential of erythropoietin (EPO) and melatonin (MLT). We hypothesized that POE induces changes in gait throughout the lifespan that is amenable to neurorepair and neuroimmunomodulation with EPO+MLT. Study Design: Basic science studies. Study Participants & Setting: Laboratory. Materials/Methods: Osmotic mini pumps were implanted in pregnant Sprague Dawley rat dams for 28days of continuous methadone (12mg/kg, 0.25L/h) or saline infusion. A cohort of methadone-­exposed pups was randomly allocated to receive EPO from postnatal day 1 (P1) to P5 at 2500U/kg/ dose and MLT from P1 to P10 at 20mg/kg. Gait was tested in both sexes in adulthood using digital analysis. Statistical differences were compared using a two-­way ANOVA with Bonferroni post-­hoc correction with p<0.05 as significant (n=8-­15/group). Results: Adult rats with POE have complex abnormalities of gait and motor function reminiscent of developmental coordination disorder. Digital analyses reveal abnormal posture, paw placement, and gait kinematics with pronounced abnormalities in stance width, stride length and midline crossing. Specifically, rats with POE have narrower stances (p<0.01), shorter strides (p<0.05), more midline crossing (p<0.005) and increased paw area (p<0.05) compared to controls. Deficits in stance width and posture were repaired with EPO+MLT treatment (p<0.05). Conclusions/Significance: Adult rats with POE have a signature gait deficit that is attenuated by a neuroreparative regimen of neonatal EPO and MLT. These data align with human studies demonstrating motor impairment, cerebral palsy, and developmental coordination disorder in children with POE as they age. Importantly, these findings suggest a potential treatment for this at-­risk population. Further studies of neuroimaging and cognitive outcomes related to POE may suggest further benefit from this treatment strategy.
C10 | MRI Findings of Children with Cerebral Palsy: Findings from a Hospital-­based Surveillance in Vietnam
T KARIM1, N GIANG2, T DUNG2, N ANH3, R DOSSETOR4, N BANG5, N BADAWI6, G KHANDAKER 7, S MOHAMMAD8, E ELLIOTT9 1Specialty of Child and Adolescent Health, Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia; 2Rehabilitation Department, National Children's Hospital, Hanoi, Vietnam; 3Department of Medical Education and Skills Laboratory, Hanoi Medical University, Hanoi, Vietnam; 4Specialty of Child and Adolescent Health, Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia; 5Medical Faculty, Phenikaa University, Hanoi, Vietnam; 6Grace Centre for

 |23
Newborn Intensive Care, Cerebral Palsy Alliance, University of Sydney, Westmead, New South Wales, Australia; 7Central Queensland Public Health Unit, Central Queensland Hospital and Health Service, Rockhampton, Queensland, Australia; 8Specialty of Child and Adolescent Health, Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia; 9Specialty of Child and Adolescent Health, Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia
Background and Objective(s): To document MRI patterns among children with cerebral palsy (CP) in Vietnam. Study Design: Cross-­sectional study. Study Participants & Setting: Children with CP presenting to the National Children's Hospital (NCH) in Hanoi, Vietnam between June and November 2017. Materials/Methods: Active prospective ascertainment using surveillance modelled on the Paediatric Active Enhanced Disease Surveillance (PAEDS) system in Australia was used to identify children with CP. MRI data for children with CP was collected from hospital records and translated for analysis. The MRI findings were classified using the MRI Classification System (MRICS). Results: MRI data was collected for 264 children during the study period; mean age: 2.5years±2.1 SD. The children predominantly had spastic CP. Most (75%, n=198) were quadriplegic and 64.9% (n=171) were level III to V using the Gross Motor Functional Classification System. Majority (44.9%, n=118) had predominant white matter injury including sequelae of intraventricular haemorrhage (IVH)/periventricular haemorrhagic infarction (PVHI) (36.9%, n=97), mild/severe periventricular leukomalacia (PVL) (7.2%, n=19) and combination of IVH sequalae and PVL (0.8%, n=2). 5.3% (n=14) had maldevelopments. Of the children, 9.5% (n=25) had predominant grey matter injury including basal ganglia/thalamus lesions (2.7%, n=7), cortical-­subcortical lesions (3.4%, n=9) and arterial infarctions (3.4%, n=9). Normal MRI findings were observed among 23.6% (n=62). Predominant white matter injury was observed among 52.7% (n=39/74) of the children who were born preterm, 56.5% (n=48/85) of the children who had birth asphyxia. Conclusions/Significance: Our study is one of the first studies reporting MRI findings among children with CP in a low-a­ nd middle-­income county and has generated valuable insights.

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

24 |
Free Paper Session D: Orthopedics: Hip
D1 | Can the Physiological Vulnerability Score Predict Outcomes of Hip Reconstruction in Children with Severe Neuromuscular Disability?
C EDWARDS1, A BEVAN2, S BUCHANAN3 1Southampton Children's Hospital, Ampfield, England, United Kingdom; 2Southampton University, Southampton, England, United Kingdom; 3Southampton Children's Hospital, Southampton, England, United Kingdom
Background and Objective(s): Hip reconstruction in orthopaedics for children with neuromuscular disease has changed dramatically over the past decade. Databases now record migration and present children early for consideration of surgery. These children have complex co-­morbidities and this can prevent a barrier to surgery with concern about the high risk of severe complications. It can be difficult to know if potential improvements to quality of life will outweigh the risks associated with surgery. This service evaluation looked to correlate the Physiological Vulnerability Score (PVS) with outcomes of hip reconstruction surgery in children with a severe neurodisability. This is a simple scoring system suited to outpatients and pre assessment based on a hospice criteria predicted early death in neuromuscular disease. Study Design: Retrospective consecutive case series. Study Participants & Setting: Seventy-­one patients were provided by a single surgeon at Southampton Children's Hospital UK, of which of which sixty-­eight met the criteria to be included. Materials/Methods: A multi-­disciplinary team (Paediatrics, palliative care, anaesthetics, nursing and orthopaedic surgery) adapted the Helen House Criteria to make a scoring system appropriate for orthopaedic surgery. The score was then assessed for user error and patient family opinion gauged. Key areas are: respiratory, Feeding, Seizure, Locomotor, Pain and other. Pre-­operative physiological vulnerability was retrospectively graded and correlated against the length of stay (LOS) and postoperative complications. Regression analysis was used to substratify patients undergoing femoral (n=48) versus femoral and pelvic osteotomies (n=20). Results: PVS ranged from 0 to 21. Increased PVS had no correlation with either LOS (p=0.169) or severity of complications (p=0.981) for patients that had isolated VDRO's. However, for patients who also underwent the addition of a pelvic osteotomy, higher PVS was associated with increased LOS (p=0.009) and severity of complications (p=0.0002). Conclusions/Significance: The Physiological Vulnerability Score offers a simple assessment of medical complexity for the orthopaedic team. It can guide the surgical journey and expectation. It leads to more informed consent by families and has increased our uptake of surgery. It also supports early intervention of isolated femoral surgery for those more

ABSTRACTS
severely medically involved. A multicentre validation and study is now underway alongside a similar trial for those undergoing scoliosis surgery.
D2 | Race Is Associated with Risk of Salvage Procedures and Post-­operative Complications After Hip Procedures in Children with Cerebral Palsy
L BROWN1, K CHO2, O TARAWNEH3, S TABAIE4 1George Washington University School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Washington, DC, USA; 2George Washington School of Medicine & Health Sciences, Potomac, MD, USA; 3New York Medical College, New York, NY, USA; 4Children's National Hospital, Washington, DC, USA
Background and Objective(s): Spastic hip dysplasia in children with cerebral palsy is a serious orthopedic issue, and despite a large number of surgical interventions available, a radical salvage hip procedure may ultimately be required. The purpose of this study was to assess whether race is an independent risk factor for cerebral palsy patients to undergo a salvage hip procedure or to suffer post-­operative complications in treating hip dysplasia. Study Design: A retrospective cohort study. Study Participants & Setting: American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement Program (NSQIP) Pediatric database, children ages 2 to 18 with cerebral palsy. Materials/Methods: This is a retrospective cohort analysis utilizing the American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement Program (NSQIP) Pediatric participant use files from 2012 to 2019. Patients listed with a diagnosis of cerebral palsy, in addition to International Classification of Diseases, 9th and 10th Revisions, Clinical Modifications (ICD-­9-­CM, ICD-­10-­CM) and current procedural terminology (CPT) codes, were used to identify patients with cerebral palsy undergoing hip procedures for hip dysplasia and to dichotomize patients into salvage or reconstructive surgeries. Univariate analyses identified significant associations between patient demographics and comorbidities with race. Multivariate regression models controlled for significant demographics and comorbidities in order to assess race as an individual risk factor to undergo salvage procedures and to suffer from postoperative complications. Results: There was a total of 3,906 patients with cerebral palsy between the ages of 2 and 18 undergoing a procedure for hip dysplasia, including 1,995 (51.1%) Caucasian patients, 768 (19.7%) Black patients, and 1,143 (29.3%) Other patients. Both Black (p=0.044) and Caucasian (p=0.046) races were identified as significant risk factors for undergoing a salvage versus a reconstructive hip procedure, with Black patients having an increased risk compared to Caucasians (OR 1.77, CI 1.02-­3.07). Only Black patients were found to have an increased risk of any postoperative complication (OR 1.26, CI 1.02-­1.56; p=0.033). Both Caucasian (p=0.017) and Black (p=0.004) races were found to be significant risk factors for patients to experience a medical complication, with Black

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ABSTRACTS
patients having an increased risk compared to Caucasians (OR 1.43, CI 1.12-­1.84). There were no significant findings between race and risk of surgical site complications, unplanned readmissions, or reoperations. Conclusions/Significance: This study demonstrates that patient race is an individual risk factor for pediatric patients with cerebral palsy to both undergo a salvage hip procedure and to experience postoperative medical complications, with Black patients having an increased risk compared to Caucasians. This study is the first to our knowledge to present patient race as an individual risk factor for children with cerebral palsy to undergo a salvage procedure and to experience postoperative complications in treating hip dysplasia.
D3 | The Efficacy of a Hip Brace for Hip Dislocation in Patients with Cerebral Palsy: A Prospective, Double-­ blinded Randomized Control Trial
J RYU1, B KIM2, J YOON3, H HAN4, Y YOON5, J LIM6, S LEE7, S CHO6, Y SHIN3, H LEE6, J JANG8, J BEOM6, J SUH9 1Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam-­ si, Kyonggi-­do, Republic of Korea; 2Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Anam Hospital, Korea University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea; 3Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Pusan National University Hospital, Biomedical Research Institute, Pusan National University School of Medicine, Busan, Republic of Korea; 4Research Institute of Human Ecology, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju, Republic of Korea; 5Chungbuk Technopark, Biocenter, Medical Device Health Team, Cheongju, Republic of Korea; 6Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea; 7Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seongnam-­ Si, Kyonggi-­do, Republic of Korea; 8Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seongnam-­si, Kyonggi-­do, Republic of Korea; 9Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Ewha Women's University Medical Center, Ewha Womans University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea
Background and Objective(s): Conservative management to prevent hip dislocation has not yet been identified, therefore, no recommendations can be provided on interventions to slow or prevent hip displacement. We aimed to investigate the efficacy of a newly-­designed hip brace in preventing progressive hip displacement in patients with severe cerebral palsy. Study Design: Multicenter, prospective, single-­blinded randomized controlled trial. Study Participants & Setting: This study included patients with severe cerebral palsy who visited the department of

 |25
rehabilitation medicine of four medical institutions. The inclusion criteria for participation were as follows: (1) age 1 to 15years, (2) GMFCS IV and V, (3) quadriplegia or diplegia for more than 6 months, and (4) written consent with permission of the child and caregiver. The exclusion criteria were as follows: (1) patients who had undergone a hip joint surgery or were scheduled to receive surgery during the trial, and (2) patients whose participation in this clinical trial was judged as inappropriate by the researchers. This study was performed at the rehabilitation unit of four teaching hospitals (Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Korea University Anam Hospital, Pusan National University Hospital, and the Jeju National University Hospital). Materials/Methods: After initial evaluation, follow-­up evaluations were performed 6 and 12 months after wearing the brace. The primary outcome was the Reimers' migration index (MI) as assessed by three blinded investigators. Analyses of the primary outcome variables were undertaken using linear mixed models. Results: The MI of the study group was significantly decreased by -­2.7±6.9% and -­3.3±6.9% at 6-­and 12-­month follow-­ups (p<0.001), but that of the control group was significantly increased by 5.9±7.4% and 9.4±10.9 % at 6-­and 12-­month follow-­ups (p<0.001). The changes in quality of life parameters (Caregiver Priorities & Child Health Index of Life with Disabilities) were favorable in the study group and reached statistical significance at the 6-­month follow-­up compared to the control group. Conclusions/Significance: The hip brace was significantly effective in preventing aggravation of hip subluxation than the control group. It effectively improved QoL in patients with cerebral palsy. Therefore, the hip brace can be a new non-­surgical treatment (NCT04033289).
D4 | Is Standing and Transfer Function Improved After Orthopedic Surgery in Youth with CP at GMFCS Levels III/IV?
N LENNON1, C CHURCH2, T CHUA3, J SALAZAR-­TORRES1, J HENLEY2, E GILLOOLY4, F KALISPERIS5, M SHRADER6, F MILLER7, J HOWARD8 1Nemours Children's Health, Wilmington, DE, USA; 2Nemours, Wilmington, DE, USA; 3Nemours, USA; 4Nemours Children's Health Delaware Valley, Wilmington, DE, USA; 5Nemours, Wilmington, DE, USA; 6Nemours A.I. Dupont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, DE, USA; 7Nemours Children's Hospital, Wilmington, DE, USA; 8Nemours Children's Health Delaware Valley, Wilmington, DE, USA
Background and Objective(s): Youth with cerebral palsy (CP) at Gross Motor Function Classification System (GMFCS) levels III/IV are at risk for losses in standing function during adolescence. Current literature acknowledges multi-­level surgery (MLS) as an effective treatment to improve gait, but its effects on standing function are not well

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

26 |
documented. The objectives of our study were (1) to describe standing function in youth with CP classified at GMFCS levels III/IV, and (2) to evaluate change after MLS. Study Design: IRB-­approved retrospective cohort study. Study Participants & Setting: A consecutive sample was created utilizing inclusion criteria: youth with CP (GMFCS III/ IV) ages 6 to 20years who underwent instrumented gait analysis (IGA). A subset who underwent MLS were evaluated for change. A total of 437 children (age 13.7±4.8years, GMFCS III [81%] and IV [19%]) were included. Ninety-­four youth were evaluated for post-­operative change 15.3±4.2 months after MLS (mean age 12.1±3.5years, GMFCS III [74%] and IV [26%]). Materials/Methods: Primary outcome measures selected to represent standing function included the Gross Motor Function Measure (GMFM) dimension D, gait velocity, Functional Mobility Scale (FMS), and the Pediatric Outcomes Data Collection Instrument (PODCI). Additional impairment level measures important to standing function included foot pressure, knee extension during stance phase of gait and knee extension PROM. Independent samples Welch's t-­tests and chi squared analyses were used to evaluate differences between GMFCS III and IV, and paired samples t-­tests and Wilcoxon signed rank tests were used to evaluate change after surgery in each classification group. Statistical significance level was set at p<0.05. Results: Youth classified as GMFCS III had higher GMFM-­D, gait velocity, PODCI transfer score, and more knee extension compared to youth classified as GMFCS IV (p<0.05). After MLS, youth at GMFCS Level III had improved PODCI global scores and Transfer and Basic Mobility subtest scores (p<0.05). The GMFCS III group also demonstrated increased knee extension PROM (p<0.01) and improved foot pressure (p<0.05) after surgery. Maximum knee extension in stance and heel impulse improved significantly in both groups (p<0.01). Conclusions/Significance: The standing function of youth with CP classified as GMFCS IV was significantly more limited than youth at GMFCS III. After MLS, both groups (III/IV) showed improvement in impairment level outcomes including knee extension and foot position while those at GMFCS III had functional improvement according to PODCI. Orthopedic surgery has the potential to improve standing function in youth with CP classified as GMFCS III however changes in function for youth at GMFCS IV are not well defined. When MLS is intended to improve standing function, a specific protocol of standing and transfer measurements should be adopted for pre-­op planning and post-­op evaluation.
D5 | The Incidence of Avascular Necrosis After Hip Containment Surgery in Children with Cerebral Palsy
J BAUER1, E RANEY2, S SIENKO3 1Shriners Hospitals for Children -­Portland, Portland, OR, USA; 2Shriners Hospitals, OHSU, Portland, OR, USA; 3Shriners Children's, Portland, OR, USA

ABSTRACTS
Background and Objective(s): The purpose of this study was to determine the rate of avascular necrosis (AVN) after hip reconstruction surgery in children with cerebral palsy (CP) and to identify any risk factors that contribute to the development of AVN in children with CP. Study Design: Retrospective cohort study. Study Participants & Setting: An institutional review board (IRB) approved retrospective review was conducted on children with CP who underwent hip containment surgery at a single institution. Materials/Methods: Radiographs were evaluated at three time points. The Reimer's migration percentage, neck shaft angle, epiphyseal shaft angle, acetabular index, center edge angle, and acetabular angle were measured. The presence of AVN was evaluated and graded by the Bucholz/Ogden and the Kalamchi/MacEwen classification systems by three fellowship trained pediatric surgeons. Statistical analysis was performed to identify risk factors that may be associated with the development of AVN. Results: A total of 181 children with CP who underwent hip containment surgery were reviewed. 35 patients underwent both pelvic and femoral procedures, 39 patients had only femoral procedures, 56 had femoral and soft tissue and 51 patients had pelvic, femoral and soft tissue procedures. The rate of AVN was 23.8% (43/181). Open reduction, previous surgery, age at surgery, EBL and preoperative Reimers migration percentage only explained 8.5% of the variance of AVN development in children undergoing surgery, with only EBL contributing significantly to the model. The rate of AVN was 26.3% for GMFCS level III, 22.9% for GMFCS level IV and 26.8% for GMFCS level V. The ICC for the Bucholz/Ogden classification was 0.339-­0.538 (Left and Right) and the ICC for the Kalamachi/MacEwen classification was 0.416-­ 0.570 (Left and Right) showing only fair to good agreement amongst these measures. Conclusions/Significance: The current classification systems available for the assessment of AVN may not capture the complexity of the hip in children with CP. While several predictors of AVN development have been proposed, only EBL significantly contributed to model suggesting that better soft tissue handling and careful hemostasis during surgery may be important in preventing AVN.
D6 | Long-­term Results of Hip Reconstruction into Adulthood in Patients with Cerebral Palsy
P CURRAN1, S STALLONE2, J BOMAR3, V UPASANI3, H CHAMBERS1 1University of California, San Diego, Rady Children's Hospital, San Diego, CA, USA; 2Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, Bologna, Italy; 3University of California, San Diego, Rady Children's Hospital, San Diego, CA, USA
Background and Objective(s): Cerebral palsy (CP) is the leading cause of physical disability during childhood. Children with CP who develop hip disease may undergo

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ABSTRACTS
surgery to preserve the hip. The goal of surgery is to improve hip congruency and alignment that will last well into adulthood. The long-­term effectiveness of these interventions into adulthood have not been widely reported. The purpose of this study is to review long-­term clinical and radiological outcomes in adults with CP who underwent hip reconstruction with femoral varus derotational osteotomy (VDRO) with or without San Diego acetabuloplasty for displacement of the hip as children. Study Design: Retrospective review of all patients presenting to the adult CP clinic at our children's hospital 2011 to 2020 was performed. Study Participants & Setting: Inclusion criteria were CP diagnosis, underwent hip reconstruction with VDRO +/-­acetabuloplasty at age 12years, and follow-­up in adult CP clinic at age 18years. Exclusion criteria were primary hip procedure at another institution, inadequate documentation, or primary procedure consisting of periacetabular osteotomy, triple innominate osteotomy, or hip salvage procedure. Materials/Methods: Clinical records were reviewed for patient demographics, CP classification, operative data, and need for secondary surgery. Radiographic measures included migration percentage (MP) and the Melbourne Cerebral Palsy Hip Classification Scale (MCPHCS). Survival of hip joint was defined as not requiring additional surgery, other than implant removal, by final follow-­up. Results: One hundred three adults with CP (188 hips; 37% female; age 22.8±4.3years) returned for follow-­up at mean 15.4±4.8years after index hip surgery. All underwent VDRO and 83 (44.7%) underwent acetabuloplasty at index procedure. MP and MCPHCS significantly improved from preop to most recent follow-­up (51±25% to 21±12%; p<0.001) and (4 to 2; p<0.001), respectively. Twelve patients underwent revision VDRO with acetabuloplasty for dysplasia with hip subluxation, 9 of whom did not have acetabuloplasty at index procedure. Six hips underwent salvage procedure with either valgus osteotomy (2) or proximal femoral resection (4) for painful hip. The overall survival at most recent follow-­up was 87%. Conclusions/Significance: A primary goal of hip reconstruction in children with CP is to restore hip congruence and prevent painful hip in adulthood. Eighty-­seven percent of hips that underwent hip reconstruction during childhood survived into adulthood at mean follow-­up of 15years. These findings provide further evidence to support the lasting effect of hip reconstruction into adulthood for those who undergo surgery as children. Further study should focus on assessing quality of life and patient/caregiver perceived impairment due to hip pathology.

 |27
Background and Objective(s): The treatment of dislocated hips in myelomeningocele patients has been a debatable subject for many tears. it is generally accepted that dislocation in thoracic and high lumbar patients, and that bilateral dislocations should not be reduced. However, the Unilateral dislocated hip in a low lumbar MMC patient is still a challenging subject. Although more and more evidence arises against relocating these hips, most papers are of small cohorts, and many orthopedic surgeons still perform these surgeries. To our knowledge, this is the largest cohort of patients with long-­term follow-­up, to be published on this subject. Study Design: This is a retrospective cohort study. Study Participants & Setting: Files of all patients that were seen in spinal injury clinic at Alyn Rehabilitation Hospital during 2019 were reviewed for this study. Materials/Methods: Data was collected for all patients seen in our clinic during 2019, and had a diagnosis of myelomeningocele. The data collected included current ambulation, current physical examination, as well as past surgical interventions, past ambulation status, and past physical exam at all computerized past visits to our clinic. Results: Three hundred and twenty-­one patients were seen in our spinal injury clinic during 2019. Of them, 277 had a diagnosis of myelomeningocele, ages 0 to 42. A total of 244MMC patients were over 2years of age, which we considered minimal age to address the issue of independent ambulation. Hip status was available for 230 patients. Over the years, 30 patients underwent surgeries aimed at relocating hips, 18 contracture releases alone, and 22 had bony procedures or open reduction surgery. Eleven of these hips remained located, while the remaining 11 hips re-­dislocated. In the low lumbar group, 10 hips were operated on, 5 of which remained located. After accounting for level of motor involvement, there was no statistical difference between achieving or maintaining ambulation between patients with located hip, unilateral dislocated hip, or bilateral dislocated hips. Of all 244 patients, only 2 had complaints concerning pain around the hip joint. Conclusions/Significance: Hip status on itself does not influence the ability of patients to achieve walking ability, and hip dislocation by itself does not cause pain even in mature patients. Reducing dislocated hips in MMC children without soft tissue function to stabilize a reduced hip, should be avoided. Maintaining Range of motion, Iliopsoas & Quadriceps strength is much more relevant for ambulation in these patients.

D7 | The MMC Hip -­To Reduce or Not to Reduce? M FRANKL1, F CARROLL2, S EYLON3 1Alyn Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel; 2Alyn Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel; 3Alyn Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel

28 |
D8 | Hip Displacement in Spinal Muscular Atrophy: The Influence of Genetic Severity and Functional Level
A CAN ULUSALOGLU1, A ASMA2, M SHRADER3, M SCAVINA4, W MACKENZIE5, A ERB6, J HOWARD7 1Nemours Children Health, Wilmington, DE, USA; 2Nemours Children's Health Delaware Valley, Wilmington, DE, USA; 3Nemours A.I. Dupont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, DE, USA; 4Pediatrics and Neurology, Sidney Kimmel Medical College at Thomas Jefferson University, Neuromuscular Program Nemours Children's Health Delaware, Wilmington, DE, USA; 5Jefferson Medical College, Wilmington, DE, USA; 6Nemours, Wilmington, DE, USA; 7Nemours Children's Health Delaware Valley, Wilmington, DE, USA
Background and Objective(s): Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is characterized by a loss of spinal cord alpha motor neurons, involving the gene encoding survival motor neuron (SMN) 1. Hip displacement (HD; subluxation/dislocation) is common in SMA, but neither genetic severity nor gross motor function level have been investigated as risk factors. Although newer disease-­modifying agents (DMA) have improved function and overall health in SMA, their effects on the prevention of HD are unknown. The purpose of this study was to determine risk factors for HD development in SMA. We hypothesized that genetic severity and decreased gross motor function would increase the HD risk, while DMA would be protective. Study Design: Retrospective cohort study. Study Participants & Setting: Children with SMA presenting to our tertiary level academic Children's hospital between January 2005 and August 2021, at least 1 hip X-­ray, and minimum 2-­year follow-­up, were included. Materials/Methods: Primary outcome measure was prevalence of HD [migration percentage (MP) 40%]. Secondary outcomes included: SMA Type (I/II/III), SMN2 copy number, Hammersmith Functional Motor Scale (HFMS, out of 66), ambulatory status [Functional Mobility Scale at 50m (FMS50)], clinically-­relevant scoliosis (>40° and/or surgery), DMA use (>1y duration, Nusinersen/Risdiplam/ Onosemnogene abeparvovec), and mechanical ventilation, as risk factors. ROC curve analysis was used to determine the HFMS cut-­off value correlated to HD. Univariate and Multivariate logistic regression analyses were performed to identify independent risk factors. Results: Eighty-­two patients (52% female) with SMA Type I (n=32,39%), II (n=36,44%), and III (n=14,17%), met the inclusion criteria, with a final follow-­up of 4.5 (SD:2.7) years. Age at first hip x-­ray was 3.4 (SD:2.9) years. The prevalence of HD was 75.6%, with a mean age of HD onset of 4.6 (SD:2.7) years. HFMS score >23 was protective against HD by ROC analysis (AUC=0.785, p=0.02). Significant risk factors for HD by univariate analysis were: SMA Type (I, p=0.002; II, p<0.002), DMA treatment (p=0.011), non-­ambulatory status (FMS50=1, p=0.001), HFMS score (23, p=0.01), and clinically relevant scoliosis (p=0.014). Multivariate analysis

ABSTRACTS
revealed SMA Type II (p<0.038), and clinically relevant scoliosis (p=0.039) to be significant independent risk factors. Conclusions/Significance: The development of HD in SMA is high, with risk factors associated with proxy measures of disease severity; most notably lower gross motor function level (by SMA type, low HFMS score), and prior clinically significant scoliosis. Identified risk factors can be used in the development of surveillance programs for early detection of HD in SMA, allowing for timely management.
D9 | Hip Displacement in Children with Leukodystrophies
S MILLER1, M JURICIC2, J FARR3, K MULPURI2 1BC Children's Hospital, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 2BC Children's Hospital, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 3BC Children's Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada
Background and Objective(s): Leukodystrophies are genetic disorders affecting primarily the white matter of the central nervous system. There are many different leukodystrophies; most are rare. Leukodystrophies are considered progressive disorders and, therefore, have been excluded from the definition of cerebral palsy. Hip displacement and dislocation have been minimally described in children with leukodystrophies. Study Design: Retrospective cohort study. Study Participants & Setting: Children with leukodystrophies in a Canadian province. Materials/Methods: In this retrospective review, children with leukodystrophies were identified though the province's hip surveillance program or through a database of children followed in the province's tertiary care pediatric Orthopedic clinic. Clinical history, radiological exams, and surgical data for all children identified were analyzed. Migration percentage (MP) was utilized to identify hip displacement and progression. Results: Sixteen children (50% male) with 7 different types of leukodystrophy were identified. Mean age at final follow up was 13.2years (range 3.2years-­23.5years). All children, except one, was non-­ambulatory with motor function consistent with children at GMFCS level IV (5 children) or level V (10 children). The ambulatory child had no evidence of hip displacement at last follow up (age 12.7years, MPs of 12% and 5%). The mean age at first x-­ray for all non-­ambulatory children was 4.1years (SD 2.4years) with mean MP at first imaging of 44% (range 0-­100%). Three children had a hip dislocation at first x-­ray (mean age 4.6years, range 1.1-­ 7.3years). Eleven of the fifteen non-­ambulatory children had undergone reconstructive surgery at a mean age of 7.7years (SD 3.5) with 19 of 22 hips having an MP greater than 30% (mean 58%, SD 26.5) at the time of surgery. One additional youth required a salvage procedure at age 15.9years. At review, the three non-­ambulatory children who had not undergone surgery ranged in age from 3.3 to 6.4years. Three of

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ABSTRACTS

 |29

the six hips in these children exceeded a MP of 30% (range 33%-­58%); only one child, age 6.0years, had MPs of less than 30% in both hips (29% and 16%). Conclusions/Significance: Prevalence of hip displacement in non-­ambulatory children with leukodystrophy was high, with 93% (14/15) having MP greater than 30%. Displacement and dislocation occurred early and progressive displacement was observed, thus warranting early and systematic surveillance. Hip surveillance guidelines for children with cerebral palsy at GMFCS levels IV and V should be followed for non-a­ mbulatory children with leukodystrophy to ensure early identification of hip displacement. Multi-­centre collaboration is required to determine whether these guidelines should be refined.
D10 | A Core Outcome Set for Lower Limb Orthopaedic Surgery for Children with Cerebral Palsy: An International Multi-­stakeholder Consensus Study
H ALMOAJIL1, S HOPEWELL2, H DAWES3, F TOYE4, T THEOLOGIS5 1University of Oxford, Oxford, England, United Kingdom; 2University of Oxford, Oxford, England, United Kingdom; 3University of Exeter, England, United Kingdom; 4Oxford University Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Oxford, England, United Kingdom; 5Oxford University Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, University of Oxford, Oxford, England, United Kingdom
Background and Objective(s): The literature on lower limb orthopaedic surgery for ambulant children with cerebral palsy (CP) demonstrates significant heterogeneity of outcomes and evidence for selective outcome reporting. This limits evidence synthesis and undermines research findings through outcome reporting bias. Although several outcomes are commonly measured and reported, these outcomes do not always capture the needs and expectations of children and families into account. Objective: To develop a minimum set of important and relevant outcomes, a "Core Outcome Set", for use in future clinical trials evaluating lower limb orthopaedic surgery for ambulant children with CP Study Design: International consensus development study. Study Participants & Setting: International multi-­ stakeholders groups include: (1) Healthcare professionals and researchers: who had experiences in managing or conducting research focus on lower limb orthopaedic surgery and post-­ surgical rehabilitation for children with CP. (2) Individuals with CP: who have had experience with at least one surgery for any lower limb deformity or have the intention of undergoing that treatment in the future. Representative of a family member (parents) or carer of a child with the above criteria. Materials/Methods: The study was designed in four parts. (1) potential outcomes were identified through systematic reviews; (2) interviews with stakeholders (healthcare professionals, researchers, children and families); (3) international two-­round e-­Delphi consensus methodology was used to gain agreement between stakeholders as to which outcomes

were "core"; (4) outcomes selected through the Delphi process were brought forward to a consensus meeting to agree on the final core outcome set. Target stakeholders from relevant national and international networks were approached to contribute to this selection. Results: The literature review and stakeholder interviews initially identified 99 outcome domains. These were grouped into 41 outcomes for prioritisation in the Delphi survey. A total of 197 participants were surveyed from 16 countries. The findings were brought forward to the consensus meetings with 21 international stakeholders. The consensus was achieved on eight outcome domains: (1) pain and fatigue; (2) lower limb structure; (3) motor function; (4) daily life activities; (5) gait-­related outcomes; (6) physical activity; (7) independence; and (8) quality of life. An adverse event domain was suggested as an essential part of the documentation. Conclusions/Significance: This study has developed an evidence-­based, internationally endorsed core outcome set for lower limb orthopaedic surgery for children with ambulant CP. The development of a core outcome set would provide more robust evidence in this field. It is recommended that these outcomes be implemented into future clinical studies to enhance the relevance, efficiency, consistency, and transparency of research outcomes, which in turn facilitate meta-­analysis/ synthesis and ultimately inform clinical practice and improve patient care.
Friday, September 23, 2022 Free Paper Session E: Gait
E1 | Classifying Sagittal Plane Gait Deviations of Children with Cerebral Palsy into Clinically Meaningful Biomechanical Phenotypes: A Novel Algorithm Used on Data Across Multiple Sites
K KRUGER1, A GRAF2, J KRZAK3, R SMITH4, B STEINLEIN4, J LINTON5, R CHAFETZ6, J DAVIDS7, A BAGLEY8 1Shriners Children's Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA; 2Shriners Children's Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA; 3Midwestern University, Downers Grove, IL, USA; 4Shriners Children's Northern California, Sacramento, CA, USA; 5Shriners Children's Texas, Houston, TX, USA; 6Shriners Children's Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA; 7Shriners Hospital for Children, Northern California and University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA; 8Shriners Hospital for Children, Sacramento, CA, USA
Background and Objective(s): Variability in clinical presentation and gait pattern in cerebral palsy (CP) may complicate the decision-­making process. A combination of clinical examination and observational gait analysis is used to classify the postural and gait pattern. However, as with any other subjective classification, the experience of the observer

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

30 |

ABSTRACTS

influences the reliability and reproducibility of the method. Clinical gait analysis, as commonly prescribed for children with CP, provides quantitative information that can be used to objectively categorize walking patterns. The objective of this work was to report on the prevalence of clinically meaningful sagittal plane gait phenotypes in children with CP across four motion analysis centers in the United States using a novel algorithm. Study Design: Cross-­sectional. Study Participants & Setting: 700 participants (60% male) and 5020 barefoot self-­selected walking speed trials were analyzed. All participants were 3 to 17years of age and diagnosed with CP. GMFCS distribution was: 32% I, 45% II, 20% III, 2% IV. Participants were seen at a motion analysis center at one of four pediatric hospitals in the United States. Materials/Methods: All participants had completed instrumented gait analysis between January 1, 2019 and December 31, 2020. Discrete kinematic variables for the hip, knee, and ankle were extracted from a shared registry. Classification categories were developed based on definitions from literature and physician review. Sagittal classifications included crouch, recurvatum, true and apparent equinus. Outlier data were removed based on averaged motion parameters collected from typically developing children at the 4 participating labs. Results: Normal was the most commonly occurring sagittal phenotype for GMFCS I (41.3%) and II (26.9%). However, this total may have been influenced by inclusion of the non-­ involved side of children with hemiplegia. Knee recurvatum with normal ankle and no excess hip flexion was the most common sagittal deviation in GMFCS I. Excess ankle dorsiflexion was the most common sagittal deviation in GMFCS Level II (17.9%), III (31.6%), and IV (27.8%). Conclusions/Significance: Deriving these clinically meaningful biomechanical phenotypes can provide objective classifications to prescribe interventions. This novel algorithm could allow for automating the classification process into the gait report generation, which would lead to improved efficiency and repeatability. While excess ankle dorsiflexion was the most common sagittal deviation in GMFCS II, this may be due to a single segment foot model being unable to register equinus associated with a midfoot break. This is not a shortcoming of the algorithm necessarily however a segmental foot model may be needed to properly classify foot gait deviations. This work demonstrates the ability of the algorithm to be applied across multiple centers. Future work aims to expand this algorithm to other joint measures, and to refine the algorithm beyond use of discrete data points.
E2 | Impact of a Machine Learning Decision-­support Tool on Psoas Lengthening Decision-­making and Outcomes in Cerebral Palsy
J SCHAEFER1, T NOVACHECK2, E BOYER2 1University of Minnesota, St. Paul, MN, USA; 2Gillette Children's Specialty Healthcare, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, MN, USA

Background and Objective(s): Intramuscular psoas lengthening (IMPL) may be used to treat hip flexor dysfunction for individuals with cerebral palsy (CP). Yet, there is no consensus on surgical indication, and outcome prediction is difficult. A random forest algorithm (RFA) was implemented at our institution in 2013 to address this. We investigated the impact of this RFA on functional hip outcomes over time and between groups. Study Design: Retrospective cohort study. Study Participants & Setting: We analyzed pre-­op and post-­op gait lab data from a tertiary children's hospital. Participants had bilateral CP, were 4 to 17years old, and underwent 2 to 7 orthopedic surgeries per limb. Materials/Methods: The RFA prediction of a good pelvic-­hip deviation index (PHiDI) outcome (met/failed) was extracted from clinical gait reports. PHiDI measures sagittal plane pelvis and hip gait kinematics (100 = mean normative curves). Good outcomes were defined as 5 point improvement in PHiDI or post-­op PHiDI >90. RFA was used to classify limbs into 4 groups: (1) CASES: met, +IMPL (2) CONTROL: met, -­IMPL (3) OVER: failed, +IMPL (4) OTHER: failed, -­IMPL Post-­op outcomes were compared between groups and to our published outcomes prior to RFA. Results: Ninety-­eight people (139 limbs) met the inclusion criteria (CASES: 7, CONTROLS: 87, OVER: 11, OTHER: 34). GMFCS level (I/II/III/IV) for the 4 groups were 0/2/3/2; 22/36/27/2; 0/7/4/0; 7/8/13/6. CASES and OVER were older (mean: 11-­12 y), more involved (GMFCS level, gait kinematics), and had greater hip flexion contracture (HFC) (Thomas test) (mean: 14-­15°). CONTROLS were the youngest (mean: 10 y) and least involved. PHiDI outcomes differed by group with cases showing the most improvement, but groups were unmatched at pre-­op. For the CASES, CONTROLS, OVER, OTHER limbs, HFC improved on average 10°, 2°, 6°, and 3°, and good PHiDI outcomes were observed in 43%, 46%, 27%, and 41%. Overall, good outcomes decreased after the RFA implementation from 58% historically to 43%. Referral practice, CP severity, and proportion of limbs predicted to have a good outcome (i.e. met criteria) were unchanged over time. However, historically, 16% had IMPL while 53% did not; after RFA implementation, 5% had IMPL and 63% did not, indicating greater conservatism. Conclusions/Significance: Overall, pelvis-­hip outcomes worsened since RFA implementation. CASE limbs had the greatest improvement statically and dynamically, though some change may be due to measurement error/regression to the mean given the low pre-­op PHiDI. IMPL was often performed on those with HFCs regardless of RFA prediction, indicating deviation from RFA recommendation, likely due to other outcomes being a priority. While these data do not support the use of the RFA to improve PHiDI outcomes, the +IMPL samples were small and RFA recommendations were not always followed so the RFA's efficacy cannot be truly evaluated. PHiDI is one measure; there are other clinical indications and outcomes (e.g. pain, hip subluxation, HFC) that clinicians consider besides the RFA prediction when pursuing IMPL.

ABSTRACTS
E3 | Evaluating Family Priorities by Age Using the Gait Outcomes Assessment List (GOAL) Questionnaire
J STOUT1, A GEORGIADIS2, K WALT3, S KOOP4, E BOYER2 1James R. Gage Center for Gait and Motion Analysis Gillette Children's Specialty Healthcare, St. Paul, MN, USA; 2Gillette Children's Specialty Healthcare, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, MN, USA; 3Gillette Children's Specialty Healthcare, Hastings, MN, USA; 4Gillette Children's Specialty Healthcare, Avon, MN, USA
Background and Objective(s): The Gait Outcomes Assessment List (GOAL) questionnaire is a valid, reliable outcome assessment of family priorities and functional mobility for ambulatory children with cerebral palsy (CP). It distinguishes priorities by Gross Motor Function Classification (GMFCS ) level. Family priorities for mobility and intervention can also differ by age. The purpose of this study was to determine if the GOAL questionnaire distinguishes family priorities by age within GMFCS levels. Study Design: Retrospective cross-­sectional study. Study Participants & Setting: Consecutive unique individuals with a diagnosis of CP (GMFCS I-­III) with a completed the GOAL questionnaire as part of a 3-­D gait analysis in a tertiary care facility for children with disabilities. Four hundred seventy-­one individuals met criteria for inclusion (284 male; mean age 10±3.7years; age categories; 4-­7years: 164; 8-­12years: 139; 13-­17years: 168; GMFCS Level I: 131, II: 206; III: 134). Materials/Methods: Caregivers of patients completed parent version 5.0 of the GOAL. The proportion of respondents who indicated items to be at least `difficult' to perform and `very important' to improve were considered priorities and were summarized by age group within each GMFCS level. Chi-­square analysis was used to test for differences with post-­hoc comparisons. Results: Top priorities differed by age within each GMFCS category. The 4 to 7-­year-­old group was most frequently distinguished age category. Priorities often shifted with age. For example, in the Gait Pattern and Appearance Domain priorities shifted from walking with feet flat (4-­7y) to walking taller (8-­12y, 13-­17y) and from walking faster (4-­7y) to walking farther (8-­12y, 13-­17y) to walking longer (13-­17y) in the Gait Function & Mobility domain. Four of 5 top priority items for 4-­to 7-­year-­olds were significantly different in GMFCS I and 1 of 5 top priorities were significantly different in GMFCS level III. Limited statistical differences were present in GMFCS level II in the top 14 priorities. Conclusions/Significance: The GOAL questionnaire identifies the differences in top priority goals based on age. When statistical significance is reached, the priorities for 4-­to 7-­year-­olds were distinguished from the other age groups. Trends in additional items were noted that did not reach statistical significance. A larger dataset will solidify these findings. Use of the GOAL questionnaire to identify family priorities and how they change with age will be an important adjunct to shared decision-­making as part of family-­centered care.

 |31
E4 | The Impact of Robotic Assisted Gait Training on Self-­reported Physical Activity and Related Outcomes
J YOUNGBLOOD1, C DIOT2, A FRIESEN3, K LARKIN-­KAISER4, E CONDLIFFE5 1University of Calgary, Canmore, AB, Canada; 2Alberta Children's Hospital, Calgary, AB, Canada; 3Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada; 4Department of Clinical Neurosciences at the University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada; 5Departments of Clinical Neurosciences and Pediatrics, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, ACHRI, Hotchkiss Brain Institute, Calgary, AB, Canada
Background and Objective(s): Robotic gait trainers are a promising new technology that may enhance physical activity for children with significant mobility impairments. Physical activity is important for the prevention of chronic diseases and low rates have been associated with short-­ term health implications, such as poor sleep, low mood and constipation. The Trexo Home robotic assisted gait trainer (Trexo), allows children with mobility impairments the opportunity to train with upright robotic assisted ambulation in their home communities. The purpose of this study was to evaluate how the initial month of Trexo use impacted patient reported outcomes related to physical activity. Study Design: We conducted an international prospective observational cohort study of people buying or leasing a Trexo for use in their home communities. Study Participants & Setting: Twenty-­seven participants were included between the ages of 3 to 18years of age (median age 7), including 13 males and 14 females who submitted data at both timepoints. Most (81%) have cerebral palsy and are dependent on others for most movement (>60% GMFCS V). Materials/Methods: Patient recorded outcomes were collected prior to obtaining a Trexo and 4 to 8weeks after the onset of training. Patient-­Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS®) for Physical Activity, Sleep Disturbance, and Positive Affect were reported via parent proxy. Parents also reported their child's bowel movement frequency. Median scores (25th -­75th percentiles) and change over time was assessed using a Wilcoxon Signed-­ Rank Test (=0.05, p<0.0125 with Bonferonni correction). Results: At baseline participants reported a median Physical Activity score one standard deviation below reference population, 43 (40.3 to 45.6). No significant change in Physical Activity was reported, with a median change of 2.1 (-­3.8 to 6), p=0.18. At baseline, 21 participants (78%) reported experiencing at least moderate Sleep Disturbances with a full group median score 64.1 (55.8 to 68.4). The majority of participants experienced a reduction in Sleep Disturbances with a median change of -­3.0 (-­7.6 to 0), p=0.0015. Positive Affect scores were 49.1 (42.5 to 45.6) at baseline and unchanged with Trexo use (p=0.21). At baseline the majority of parents reported that their child had a bowel movement at least every other day and there was no significant change with Trexo use (p=0.14).

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

32 |
Conclusions/Significance: We did not detect changes in parent-­reported physical activity after the first month of Trexo use, however parents reported difficulty applying the tool to their children. Similarly positive affect and frequency of bowel movement did not change. There was a significant reduction in sleep disturbances consistent with that observed previously in a case study. Future research is needed to directly measure if improvements in physical activity are achieved with Trexo use and if changes in activity are indeed associated with reductions in sleep disturbances.
E5 | Cost Analysis Supports the Use of Computerized Gait Analysis for Surgical Planning in Children with Cerebral Palsy
S OUNPUU1, K PIERZ2, S RETHLEFSEN3, T WREN4 1Connecticut Children's Medical Center, University of Connecticut School of Medicine, Farmington, CT, USA; 2Connecticut Children's Medical Center, University of Connecticut School of Medicine, Hartford, CT, USA; 3Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA; 4Children's Hospital Los Angeles, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
Background and Objective(s): Computerized gait analysis (CGA) has enhanced our understanding of the complex gait pathology in children with cerebral palsy (CP) and thus allowed for a multilevel surgical approach (SEMLS) instead of sequential surgery approach (SSA). It is unclear if CGA increases the overall cost of providing orthopedic surgical care. Therefore, the objective of this study was to document the differences in billable provider charges for SEMLS based on CGA and SSA without CGA for orthopedic surgical management of ambulatory children with CP. Study Design: The nine most common surgical combinations (both unilateral and bilateral, soft tissue or soft tissue plus bony) were determined based upon an existing surgical outcomes database. Study Participants & Setting: There were no study participants in this financial analysis which was conducted at a tertiary care center of a children's hospital. Materials/Methods: The nine orthopedic surgical combinations were subdivided into SSA with 1 or 2 surgical procedures per admission. The charges for each surgical combination were estimated based on CPT codes and current billing procedures. Professional coders determined all surgical charges using the multiple procedure charge reduction based on the Medicaid/Medicare model of billing. Charges included surgery, anesthesia, operating and recovery room, hospital stay, physical therapy and, for the SEMLS patients only, pre-­operative CGA. CGA included 3D kinematics and kinetics, foot pressures, surface electromyography and physician interpretation. A fine wire EMG procedure was also charged for surgical combinations that included the posterior tibialis. SEMLS and SSA costs were compared using paired t-t­ests. The relationship between

ABSTRACTS
the total charge of SEMLS and the difference between SSA and SEMLS charges was examined using Pearson's correlations. Results: The total charges to complete each combination was higher for SSA than for SEMLS for all surgical combinations. The differential ranged from $10,247 to $75,069 and the percentage difference ranged from 20-­47% which is more than the cost of CGA ($3,513 -­$4,452). The dollar difference (r=0.98, p<0.0001) and percentage difference (r=0.79, p=0.01) were both related to the total charge of the SEMLS surgery. Conclusions/Significance: This analysis shows that there are lower financial costs associated with SEMLS including CGA vs. SSA without CGA for the treatment of multilevel gait problems in children with CP. For every one of the 9 surgical combinations studied, the charges were higher for SSA than for SEMLS, regardless of the extent of surgery performed. Based on this finding, in addition to the other benefits of SEMLS, SEMLS including CGA is recommended over SSA for the treatment of gait disorders in children with CP. Other benefits of SEMLS include reduced anesthesia risks, reduced time away from school (for patients) and work (for caregivers). These findings may allow more children with CP to benefit from CGA and SEMLS as part of their orthopedic surgical care.
E6 | Long-­term Evolution of Walking in Unilateral Cerebral Palsy: A 12-­years Follow-­up of 40 Children
A BONNEFOY-­MAZURE1, G DE COULON2, P LASCOMBES3, A BREGOU4, S ARMAND1 1Kinesiology Laboratory, Geneva University Hospitals and University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland; 2Pediatric Orthopedic Service, Department of Child and Teenage Medicine, Geneva University Hospitals and University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland; 3Pediatric Orthopedic Service, Department of Child and Teenage Medicine, Geneva University Hospitals and University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland; 4Pediatric Orthopedic Service, Department of Child and Adolescent Medicine, Lausanne University Hospital and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Vaud, Switzerland
Background and Objective(s): Unilateral spastic cerebral palsy (USCP) is the most prevalent subtype of CP. The majority of patients with USCP become normal independent during their daily life despite musculoskeletal deformities impairing their gait pattern. Assessment of their gait evolution and effects of surgical treatments on this is often performed in short-­term studies. This study aimed to analyze the long-­term evolution of gait in USCP by examining patients' modified Gait Profile Score (mGPS without hip rotation), Gait Variable Scores (GVS), walking speed, and the inf luence of single-­level surgery (SLS). Study Design: Ambi-­directional cohort study.

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ABSTRACTS
Study Participants & Setting: Forty patients with USCP (GMFCS I) who had undergone two clinical gait analyses (CGAs) were enrolled (mean age: 9.8 [3.2] years at the first CGA and 21.6 [6.0] years at the last CGA), corresponding to an evolution of 12 (5) years. Materials/Methods: Evolution of mGPS, GVS, and dimensionless walking speed were calculated. The values of the affected and unaffected side were calculated for the gait scores. Patients were divided into categories: `No surgery' and `Single-­level surgery' (SLS). Statistical analyses (paired t-­tests) were performed between first and last CGAs all patients together and for each treatment category. Pearson's correlations were calculated to evaluate associations between changes in mGPS and dimensionless walking speed and mGPS and dimensionless walking speed at baseline. Results: Mean mGPS of the affected side was significantly improved at last CGA, regardless of the treatment category: baseline = 8.0° (2.2) vs. follow-­up = 6.4° (1.5), effect size = 0.69, p<0.001. It was also observed a significant improvement for the unaffected side (baseline = mGPS: 6.8° [1.8] vs. follow-­up mGPS = 5.6° [1.5]). Significant negative correlations were found between mGPS change and mGPS at the baseline (r=-­0.79, p<0.001) and between dimensionless walking speed change and dimensionless walking speed at the baseline (r=-­0.77, p<0.001). In addition, significant improvements were observed for the two categories (SLS and No Surgery) in terms of mGPS for the affected and unaffected sides (SLS category -­affected side: baseline = 8.1° (2.2) vs. follow-­up = 6.5° (1.6), effect size = 0.65, p=0.002 and no surgery category (affected side: baseline = 7.9° [2.9] vs. follow-­up = 6.1° [1.1], effect size = 0.88, p=0.01). Finally, for the SLS's category, significant improvements were observed for the mean GVS of the hip, knee, ankle flexion-­extension angles and the foot progression angle. No significant changes were observed in mean dimensionless walking speed. Conclusions/Significance: This study highlights that patients with USCP have a positive evolution in terms of gait function over time with and without surgery. In addition, regarding specifically GVS values, we observed a positive impact of orthopedic surgeries at the knee, ankle and foot levels and more particularly for those with poor gait quality at baseline.

 |33
E7 | Does Posterior Tibialis Split Tendon Routing Impact Postoperative Coronal Plane Ankle Kinematics?
F SCHEEPERS1, K DAVIES2, T BHATNAGAR3, D WICKENHEISER4, A BLACK5, C ALVAREZ6, K MULPURI7, L LEVEILLE8 1Department of Orthopaedics, BC Children's Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 2Motion Lab, Sunny Hill Health Centre at BC Children's Hospital; University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 3Motion Lab, Sunny Hill Health Centre, BC Children's Hospital, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 4Motion Lab, Sunny Hill Health Centre, BC Children's Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 5Sunny Hill Health Centre, BC Children's Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 6RCPSC, POSNA, COA, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 7BC Children's Hospital, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 8University of British Columbia, BC Children's Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada
Background and Objective(s): Equinovarus foot deformity is common in children with cerebral palsy (CP). Early accounts of split tendon transfer of the posterior tibialis (SPOTT) procedure routes the transferred portion of the tendon posterior to the fibula. Alternate routing through the interosseous membrane has subsequently been described. The purpose of this study is to determine if routing of the split tendon transfer through the interosseous membrane (IO group) improves coronal plane ankle kinematics during stance compared to routing posterior to the fibula (Posterior group). Study Design: Intervention study. Study Participants & Setting: A consecutive sample of 76 children with a diagnosis of CP and history of a SPOTT procedure for equinovarus foot deformity were identified from surgeon procedure logs at a tertiary care pediatric centre. Children with preoperative and postoperative computerized gait analysis were included for review. Thirty-­eight children met the inclusion criteria (15 diplegia; 23 hemiplegia; GMFCS Level I or II). Average age was 10.3years (range, 5-­19 years). Materials/Methods: A retrospective cohort chart review was completed to determine surgical technique and identify concurrent surgical interventions performed at the ankle. A randomly selected single side was included for children with bilateral procedures. Preoperative and postoperative coronal plane kinematic gait data were analyzed and compared between groups. Non-­parametric tests determined significance at p<0.05. Results: Thirty-­one children had either a gastrocnemius recession (GR) (13 children) or tendo Achilles lengthening (TAL) (18 children) performed concurrently with the SPOTT procedure. In the Posterior group (27 children), preoperative median ankle varus during stance phase was 1.80 degrees (Q1: 0.05, Q3: 6.29) and postoperative median ankle varus during stance was 0.61 degrees (Q1: -­3.75, Q3: 4.66). Median preoperative to postoperative change in average ankle varus

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

34 |
during stance showed no significant change (p=0.055; median: -­0.92, Q1: -­6.51, Q3: 3.02). In the IO group (11 children), preoperative median ankle varus during stance was 8.01 degrees (Q1: 6.18, Q3: 12.85) and postoperative median ankle varus during stance was -­4.99 degrees (Q1: -­8.34, Q3: -­0.43). Preoperative to postoperative change in average ankle varus during stance significantly increased by a median value of 13.00 degrees (p=0.0049; Q1: -­21.29, Q3: -­8.48). There was a significant difference between groups in preoperative to postoperative change in average ankle varus in stance; the IO approach reduced average ankle varus during stance by an estimate of 13 degrees (p=0.009) more than in the posterior approach. Conclusions/Significance: Both routing types significantly improved postoperative median ankle varus during stance. There was significantly more varus correction in the IO group; however, this group also had significantly more preoperative median ankle varus. From these observations, either routing method for the SPOTT is an acceptable choice for coronal plane correction in the spastic equinovarus foot deformity.
E8 | Reliability and Utility of a Novel Classification Scheme for Gait Deviations in Children with Persistent Idiopathic Toe Walking
S CHILDERS1, J DAVIDS2, S BROWN3, V KULKARNI4, A BAGLEY5 1UCDavis School of Medicine, Shriners Hospitals Northern California, Sacramento, CA, USA; 2Shriners Hospital for Children, Northern California and University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA; 3Shriners Hospital for Children Northern California, Sacramento, CA, USA; 4Shriners Hospitals for Children -­Northern California, Sacramento, CA, USA; 5Shriners Hospital for Children, Sacramento, CA, USA
Background and Objective(s): Typically developing children in whom toe walking does not resolve spontaneously by school age are considered to have Persistent Idiopathic Toe Walking (ITWp). Little is known about the natural history and surgical management outcomes in children with ITWp. The only existing classification scheme based upon quantitative data for children with ITWp, described by Alvarez, is imprecise, and external validity has not been established. A comprehensive classification scheme based upon gait deviations in children with ITWp has been developed to facilitate clinical decision making and outcomes assessment. Study Design: A retrospective cohort study was performed of participants with an established diagnosis of ITWp, who were evaluated at a tertiary referral center by a standardized protocol including quantitative gait analysis. Study Participants & Setting: Sixty five neurologically normal children (22 girls, 43 boys; mean age was 11.1years range 6.0-­19.4years; 130 lower limbs) with ITWp were studied.

ABSTRACTS
Materials/Methods: Pre-­and post-­operative data (mean 13 months following surgery) were available for 26 of the 65 participants (52 limbs). Cases were classified using the previously described Alvarez classification and a novel Shriners Hospitals classification (SHC-­ITWp). Intra-­and inter-­ observer reliability were determined for the SHC-­ITWp (30 limbs including pre-­and post-­op conditions), as was utility (percentage classifiable) for both Alvarez and SHC-­ITWp (130 limbs, prior to intervention; 52 limbs following surgery to improve gait). Results: The SHC-­ITWp exhibited excellent reliability, with intra-­rater agreement of 96.7% (weighted kappa=0.98); and inter-­rater agreement of 86.7% (weighted kappa o=0.93). The Alvarez classification exhibited poor utility, failing to classify 59 of 130 limbs (45%) prior to intervention, and 23 of 52 limbs (44%) following surgery. The SHC-­ITWp exhibited excellent utility, successfully classifying each limb (130 prior to intervention, 52 limbs following surgery) discretely into one category. Conclusions/Significance: The Alvarez classification exhibited marked deficiencies when applied to a large cohort of participants (including pre-­and postoperative data) with ITWp. The SHC-­ITWp exhibited excellent reliability and utility in classifying the limbs of children with ITWp prior to interventions and following surgery to improve gait. The SHC-­ITWp can be used to classify children with ITWp before and after musculoskeletal surgery to improve gait. Standardized classification of ITWp will facilitate sharing and comparison of data among centers. This tool can be utilized to clarify natural history, refine clinical decision-­making, and improve outcome assessment, following a range of treatment options, for children with ITWp.
E9 | Efficacy of Serial Casting Protocols in Idiopathic Toe Walking
T SHIREL1, L KRACH2, T SYLVANUS2, K CHO3, A AUTHEMENT4 1Gillette Children's Specialty Healthcare, Minneapolis, MN, USA; 2Gillette Children's Specialty Healthcare, St. Paul, MN, USA; 3Gillette Children's Specialty Healthcare, St. Paul, MN, USA; 4Gillette Children's Specialty Hospital, St. Paul, MN, USA
Background and Objective(s): Idiopathic toe-­walking (ITW) is a diagnosis of exclusion in children with toe-­toe gait. A relationship between ITW and decreased range of motion is postulated. Treatments focus on increasing available ankle dorsiflexion including serial casting. Currently, there is no consensus for duration of serial casting or appropriate cast-­change intervals for maximum benefit. The objective of this study is to determine if range of motion improves more with casting intervals of one versus two weeks in idiopathic toe-­walkers. Study Design: Retrospective cohort study.

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ABSTRACTS
Study Participants & Setting: Retrospective chart review of 180 patients, ages 0 to 9years with ITW undergoing weekly casting (n=29) and 2-­week casting (n=57) at a tertiary children's hospital from 2014 to 2020 were included. Materials/Methods: Range of motion (ROM) at each casting interval was collected and compared at baseline, baseline to 2weeks, 2weeks to 4weeks, and baseline to final casting. ROM was defined in degrees and set in relation to neutral anatomic ankle position. Baseline characteristics of age, gender, recurrence of ITW, previous treatments, pain complaint, family history of ITW, and percentage of time toe-­walking were also collected and compared. Statistical analyses performed with SAS v9.4, included Chi-­squared tests, two-­sample t-­tests and linear mixed regression modeling. All study outcome distributions were assessed for normality and outliers using QQ plots and histograms. p-­values <0.05 were considered statistically significant. Results: Average ROM increased across time in both groups. The ROM from baseline to 2weeks was 10.40° vs 7.51° in the 1-­week vs 2-­week casting interval, respectively (p=0.005). The baseline to final measurement was 13.47° vs 9.75° in the 1-­week vs 2-­week casting interval, respectively (p<0.001). However, the amount of ROM improvement from 2weeks to 4weeks was the same between the two groups (~5°). The initial ROM was found to be worse in the 1-­week vs 2-­week casting interval (-­5.37° vs 1.36°) (p<0.001). Results remained significant when adjusted for initial ROM. There was no significant difference found in duration of casting, recurrence of toe-­walking, previous casting, or orthotic use when comparing the two groups. Those with a family history of toe walking had a lower baseline ROM compared to those without a family history of toe walking (-­2.86° vs 0.75°) (p=0.013). Conclusions/Significance: The results of this study suggest that greater improvements in ROM can be achieved by casting at 1-­week intervals compared to 2-­week intervals, especially within the first two weeks of casting. Study limitations include a smaller sample size in the 1-­week casting interval group.
E10 | Surgical Management of Severe Equinus Deformity in Ambulatory Children with Cerebral Palsy
J DAVIDS1, K SOUFI2, D WESTBERRY3, P SARASWAT4, A BAGLEY5 1Shriners Hospital for Children, Northern California and University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA; 2University of California Davis School of Medicine, Shriners Hospital for Children, Sacramento, CA, USA; 3Shriners Hospital for Children Greenville, Greenville, SC, USA; 4Shriners Hospital for Children Greenville, Greenville, SC, USA; 5Shriners Hospital for Children, Sacramento, CA, USA
Background and Objective(s): Tendo Achilles lengthening (TAL) for the management of equinus contractures in ambulatory children with cerebral palsy (CP) is generally

 |35
not recommended due to concerns of over-­lengthening, resulting in ankle plantarflexor weakness and crouch gait. However, in some cases, surgical correction of severe equinus deformities can only be achieved by TAL. The goal of this study is to assess the outcomes following TAL in such cases. Study Design: Intervention study, retrospective cohort, consecutive sample. Study Participants & Setting: Children with CP with severe equinus contractures (ankle dorsiflexion with the knee extended of -­20 degrees or worse) who underwent TAL as part of a single event multilevel surgery (SEMLS), with pre-­and post-­operative gait analysis studies. Materials/Methods: Outcomes were assessed with respect to physical examination, kinematics, kinetics, dynamic pedobarography, and radiography. Continuous data were analyzed by paired t-­test, and categorical data by McNemar Test. Results: There were 60 participants (49 unilateral, 11 bilateral CP; 38 GMFCS II, 22 GMFCS I; mean age at surgery 10.6years, mean time from surgery to post-­operative gait study was 1.3years). On physical examination ankle dorsiflexion with the knee extended improved from -­28 to 5 degrees (p<0.000). The ankle Movement Analysis Profile (MAP) improved from 34.4 to 8.6 (p<0.000). First rocker was present in 72% of cases following surgery. The ankle moment in terminal stance improved from 0.43 to 0.97 Nm/ kg (p<0.000). The location of the center of pressure at Initial Contact was in the hindfoot or midfoot in 77% of cases following surgery. Significant improvements (p<0.000) were seen in radiographic measures of calcaneal pitch, naviculocuboid overlap, and talocalcaneal angles following surgery. There were no significant differences in any of the outcome parameters between participants with unilateral versus bilateral CP. Conclusions/Significance: The outcomes following TAL for the management of severe equinus deformity in ambulatory children with CP were good 1 year following surgery, with significant improvements in physical examination, kinematics, kinetics, pedobarography, and radiography. There was no evidence of over lengthening or excessive weakness following surgery. This study does not advocate for the widespread use of TAL to correct equinus deformity in children with CP. However, it does show that good outcomes following TAL are possible in properly selected participants with severe contractures when the dosing of the surgery is optimal (correction of contracture to between 0 to 5 degrees of dorsiflexion with the knee extended) and the procedure is performed in the setting of SEMLS (simultaneously addressing soft tissue and skeletal deformities at the knees and hips).

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

36 |
Free Paper Session F: Mental Health/ Pain
F1 | Altered Pain Network Functional Connectivity in Children with Bilateral Cerebral Palsy
N GORNY1, D DAMIANO2, A HOON3, M LINDQUIST4, J PEKAR5, L JANTZIE6, A VACONCELLOS4, E CHIN3 1Kennedy Krieger Institute, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA; 2National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA; 3Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, MD, USA; 4Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA; 5Johns Hopkins University, Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, MD, USA; 6Johns Hopkins University, Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, MD, USA
Background and Objective(s): A majority of individuals with cerebral palsy (CP) report chronic pain. While children with CP typically have structural brain injury, functional brain networks responsible for pain processing have not been examined. Our objectives were (1) to characterize pain network alterations in children with CP and (2) to determine if alterations were associated with reported pain levels. Study Design: This was an observational cross-­sectional reanalysis of all study participants (recruited using clinical criteria). Study Participants & Setting: In the setting of a clinical exercise trial, 22 children aged 5 to 17years with bilateral CP and 19 typically developing, age-­matched children underwent baseline evaluation including MRI and functional assessment. Inclusion criteria for children with CP included GMFCS levels I to III and etiology consistent with MRI Classification System-­defined bilateral periventricular leukomalacia following premature birth. Scans with artifact, head motion, or malformation obscuring gyral patterns were excluded leaving 13 children with CP and 17 control participants. Materials/Methods: For each functional connection, group differences were examined using non-­parametric rank sum tests corrected for multiple comparisons. For connections with significant group differences, correlations vs. Pediatrics Outcomes Data Collection Instrument (PODCI) caregiver comfort/pain scores were examined for children with CP. Results: Children with CP had significantly greater functional connectivity (FC) between the insula and post central gyrus (PoCG) (CTRL and CP median±IQR z=0.31±0.28 vs. z=0.52±0.35, respectively; corrected p=0.049). Children with CP also showed trends (uncorrected p<0.05, corrected p>0.1) towards increased functional connectivity between the PoCG and thalamus (z=0.10±0.39 vs. 0.33±0.42) and decreased functional connectivity between the lateral orbital frontal cortex and dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (z=0.20±0.23 vs. 0.04±0.23). Greater insula-­PoCG functional connectivity in patients with CP trended towards negative correlation with

ABSTRACTS
PODCI comfort/pain scores (more pain correlating with greater connectivity; =-­0.58, 95%CI [-­0.88;0.04]). Conclusions/Significance: Children with CP had increased resting functional connectivity between somatosensory and affective networks, and connectivity trended higher in children with pain. Further examination of these systems may help clarify chronic pain mechanisms.
F2 | Characteristics of Cognitive Behavioral Therapies for Individuals with Cerebral Palsy: A Scoping Review
T SILBERG1, I CAVEN2, D LEVAC3, D FEHLINGS4 1Department of Psychology, Bar-­Ilan University, Misgav-­Dov, HaDarom, Israel; 2Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; 3Faculty of Medicine, School of Rehabilitation, University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada; 4Holland Bloorview Kids Rehabilitation Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
Background and Objective(s): Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is a well-­established psychological therapy to explore how thoughts and behaviors affect physical, psychological, and social well-­being. Physiological and psychosocial issues constitute a major concern for individuals with Cerebral Palsy (CP), predicting restrictive participation and decreased quality of life. Yet, limited evidence exists on CBT interventions for individuals with CP. Thus, a scoping review was conducted to identify and synthesize published evidence on CBT for individuals with CP. Our goals were to (1) describe the extent of the published evidence on CBT for individuals with CP, (2) describe the main cognitive and behavioral characteristics of the interventions, (3) identify barriers and facilitators to their success, focusing on feasibility indicators and markers of success, and (4) identify gaps for further research and practice opportunities. Study Design: Scoping review. Study Participants & Setting: N/A for scoping review. Materials/Methods: A scoping review methodology informed a literature search for papers published between 1991 to 2021. The databases searched were Ovid MEDLINE, Embase, PsychINFO, Scopus, CINAHL, ERIC, and Web of Science. Grey literature was also searched. Articles were screened, reviewed and categorized using Distiller Systematic Review Software, and critically appraised for quantitative and/or qualitative criteria. Results: Out of 1265 publications identified, 14 met inclusion criteria. Elements associated with the specific study characteristics (46% female; 6-­65years), type of CBT techniques used (third-­wave [n=6]; cognitive [n=3]; integrated cognitive and behavioral [n=2]; bio-­feedback training [n=2]), and features of the study context and methodological quality (two randomized clinical trials, small sample sizes [n<12]), were identified. Most studies reported having psychological targets of intervention (n=10), as well as secondary physiological (n=3) or social (n=2) objectives. All studies reported

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ABSTRACTS
at least one pre-­determined effectiveness outcome measure. Improvement in psychological symptoms (e.g., stress, anxiety, depression) was reported in n=7 studies, as well as a decrease in adverse physiological symptoms (e.g., pain, sleep quality) (n=5). Feasibility indicators were described in nearly one-­third of the papers. Several barriers and limitations with the CBT interventions were also identified. Conclusions/Significance: This scoping review demonstrated that CBT can be adapted for people with CP. Psychological targets (e.g., depression, anxiety) were the main focus of the interventions. However, there is relatively little evidence, and more research on the feasibility and effectiveness of CBT for individuals with CP is needed. The current results provide a base on which to build towards optimizing CBT research and interventions for individuals with CP. Subsequent research should use more detailed feasibility measures, provide information on the specific CBT adaptations conducted, and describe sample characteristics associated with positive outcomes.
F3 | Cognitive Behavioral Pain Management Program for Children with Cerebral Palsy and Chronic pain: a Feasibility Pilot Study
T SILBERG1, R WILLIS2, S AIMOLA3, D FEHLINGS4 1Department of Psychology, Bar-­Ilan University, Misgav-­Dov, HaDarom, Israel; 2Holland Bloorview Kids Rehabilitation Hospital, Bloorview Research Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada; 3Holland Bloorview Kids Rehabilitation Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada; 4Holland Bloorview Kids Rehabilitation Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
Background and Objective(s): Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is a psychological intervention frequently used for pediatric chronic pain. To date, no study has examined the feasibility and effectiveness of CBT for chronic pain in children/youth with CP. We aimed to (1) assess the feasibility of a CBT treatment protocol; (2) evaluate the treatment effect on pain and pain management skills; (3) understand the experience of children, caregivers and clinicians using semi-­structured interviews. Study Design: The current study used a case-­series design. Study Participants & Setting: Eight children with chronic pain and CP aged 9 to 18 and their caregivers participated. Three withdrew, two due to challenges related to COVID-­19. Five children and six parents completed the intervention. The program consisted of six 120-­minute in-­person group sessions. Materials/Methods: Outcomes included feasibility indicators (with pre-­determined success criteria) and pain and pain-­coping measures at pre and post intervention and at 3 months follow-­up. Achievement of individualized goals were evaluated using the Canadian Occupational Performance Measure (COPM). Structured interviews were conducted

 |37
separately with clinicians, parents and children. A thematic analysis approach was used for qualitative data. Results: Feasibility indicators: (1) 53% of the families who were approached and eligible to participate, consented, exceeding the 40% success criteria. (2) Five of six families completed treatment (83%), not meeting 90% treatment completion success criteria. Success criteria for (3) outcome measure completion and (4) treatment adherence was met, as all families completed questionnaires and attended at least five of six sessions. Pain intensity did not change from pre to post intervention (Med=3), then slightly increased at follow-­up (Med=4). Mean pain interference scores increased from pre to post intervention, then decreased at follow-­up. Child's pain avoidance scores decreased from pre to post intervention, and parent's acceptance of their child's pain increased from pre to post intervention, then decreased at follow-­up. COPM performance goals increased from pre to post intervention (mean change=3.11, SD=1.79), meeting the COPM clinically significant change threshold. Qualitatively, participants were unanimous that the CBT intervention was a positive experience. The program appeared feasible for participants to adhere to and engage in. However, sample heterogeneity related to variation in age, cognitive level and pain experience was identified as a major challenge to program's acceptability by the children, parents, and clinicians. Conclusions/Significance: CBT for children/youth with CP and their caregivers is feasible and supports a biopsychosocial approach to pediatric chronic pain. Although our results indicate varying responses on pain measures, they emphasize enhanced use of pain coping strategies by both children and parents. Subsequent research should use larger sample sizes and allow subgrouping of developmental age, and pain experiences.
F4 | Dose of Gabapentin as Part of a Multimodal Pain Protocol for Selective Dorsal Rhizotomy Does Not Impact Percentage of Rootlets Transected
M LYNCH, J BRANDENBURG Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA
Background and Objective(s): There is robust adult surgical literature describing the opioid sparing, analgesic benefits of perioperative gabapentin yet little is published in pediatrics with only three studies using gabapentin within multimodal analgesia protocols for selective dorsal rhizotomy (SDR). No studies have evaluated the relationship between dose of gabapentin at time of SDR and overall percent rootlets transected during SDR. This is of interest as gabapentin can reduce spasticity, though exact mechanism remains unclear. This potential to inhibit neuron activity may also reduce responsiveness of nerves to stimulation during EMG monitoring for SDR and negatively impact percentage of rootlets transected. We hypothesized that dose of gabapentin would inversely correlate with the overall percent of rootlets transected.

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

38 |
Study Design: Retrospective cohort study with participants included by consecutive sampling. Study Participants & Setting: Participants had a diagnosis of cerebral palsy (CP), a SDR between 2010 to 2019 at our tertiary care center, and consented for research use of their medical record. Materials/Methods: After IRB approval, retrospective chart review was performed. At our institution, SDR is performed at the cauda equina from levels L2-­S1 with EMG monitoring. Gabapentin titration begins 3weeks prior to SDR. Primary outcome was the relationship between the dose of gabapentin at time of SDR (mg/kg/day) and percent of rootlets cut. Data was analyzed using simple linear regression. A slope of 0 is no correlation and R2 of 0 indicates the regression line explains none of the data variability. Secondary outcomes were description of gabapentin dose, length of time used, and adverse effects as well as length of time of opioid use. Results: 31 individuals met inclusion criteria. Mean age was 7.3years (range 3.4-­21.6). 58% were female, 3% non-­binary, and 39% male. 30 (97%) had bilateral CP. 16 (52%) were GMFCS II, 5 (16%) GMFCS III, 4 (13%) GMFCS IV, and 6 (19%) GMFCS V. The linear regression slope for gabapentin dose versus percent rootlets cut was -­0.090 with a R2 of 0.012 and p=0.56. Only 1/31 (3%) discontinued gabapentin prior to surgery due to a significant side effect of nausea. Average dose at SDR was 14.78 mg/kg/day (standard deviation 7.21, range 0-­38.63). 22/27 (81.5%) individuals were off opioids at time of inpatient rehabilitation dismissal. The average length of gabapentin treatment after SDR was 6.28weeks (standard deviation 5.83, range 0-­28). Conclusions/Significance: Gabapentin dose at time of SDR did not predict number of rootlets transected. Significant adverse effects of gabapentin were rare. Very few individuals required opioids for ongoing pain management upon rehab unit dismissal with weaning of gabapentin occurring within a couple months for most individuals. A controlled, prospective study to evaluate the optimal gabapentin dosing, effect on pain control, and opioid consumption in children with cerebral palsy undergoing SDR is needed.
F5 | The Association Between Pain Intensity and Sleep Disturbance in Children and Youth with Cerebral Palsy: A Cohort Study
H SHEARER1, P CÔTÉ2, S HOGG-­JOHNSON3, P MCKEEVER4, D FEHLINGS5 1Bloorview Research Institute, Institute of Disability and Rehabilitation Research Ontario Tech University, Toronto, ON, Canada; 2Faculty of Sciences and Institute for Disability and Rehabilitation Research, Ontario Tech University, Oshawa, ON, Canada; 3Canadian Memorial Chiropractic College, Toronto, ON, Canada; 4Bloomberg Faculty of Nursing, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; 5Holland Bloorview Kids Rehabilitation Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada

ABSTRACTS
Background and Objective(s): Although pain is a commonly reported symptom in children and youth with cerebral palsy (CP), little is known about short-­term pain trajectories and their impact on sleep disturbance. Sleep quality is important during childhood/youth and disturbances can affect function, mood, concentration and academic performance. Our objective was to identify the association between short-­term pain trajectory group membership and sleep disturbance in children and youth with cerebral palsy. Study Design: Prospective cohort study. Study Participants & Setting: This cohort study took place between November 2019 and October 2020. We recruited children and youth from two Canadian children's treatment centers who: (1) were 8 to 18years old; (2) had CP with any gross motor function classification system (GMFCS) level; (3) could complete a validated sorting task; and (4) could self-­ report pain and sleep disturbance. Convenience sampling was undertaken using a variety of recruitment strategies. Materials/Methods: Sleep disturbance was the primary outcome measured by the paediatric Patient-­Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System® (PROMIS) short form (v1.0-­4a). Standardized self-­report baseline and follow-­up electronic questionnaires were completed. These included self-­reported pain intensity (Faces Pain Scale-­ Revised [FPS-­R]), sleep disturbance (PROMIS), and demographic and clinical characteristics. Pain intensity was measured weekly for five weeks and sleep disturbance was measured at baseline and five weeks. Latent class growth models identified pain trajectories and general linear models assessed the association between trajectory group membership and sleep disturbance. Several possible confounders were considered in the analysis. Results: Of the 190 eligible for in-­person screening, 111 were screened and 102 were enrolled. All GMFCS levels were represented (I=40.6 %; II=15.8%; III=20.8%; IV=13.9%; V=8.9%). Five pain intensity trajectories were identified. Three had very low (35.4%), low (32.4%) or high (4.9%), stable pain intensity. One trajectory had moderate, fluctuating pain (16.8%) and one had high pain decreasing to moderate levels (10.5%). All trajectory groups had crude mean sleep disturbance scores at 5weeks (56.1; 95% CI 51.2, 50.8 or more) greater than the reference population mean of 50 (SD=10). Trajectory group members with high mean pain intensity decreasing to moderate intensity had the lowest crude and adjusted mean sleep disturbance scores (adjusted =-­0.3; 95% CI -­3.5, 3.0). Those in the stable, high mean pain trajectory had the highest sleep disturbance (adjusted =5.7; 95% CI 1.2, 10.2). Conclusions/Significance: Trajectory group members with stable, high pain intensity reported the highest sleep disturbance. The results highlight the importance of identifying pain and its impact on sleep in order to prevent or mitigate short and long-­term consequences in children/youth with CP.

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ABSTRACTS
F6 | Frequency of General Practitioner Consultations and Pain as a Reason for Encounter in Children with Cerebral Palsy; A Norwegian National Registry Linkage Study
S LARSEN1, T EIDE2, C BRUNBORG3, K RAMSTAD4 1Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Department of Paedatric Neurology, Division of Paediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway; 2Department of General Practice, Institute of Health and Society, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway; 3Oslo Center for Statistics and Epidemiology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway; 4Department of Paedatric Neurology, Division of Paediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway
Background and Objective(s): Pain is a health complaint well known to general practitioners (GPs). Pain prevalence is higher in children with cerebral palsy (CP) than in the general paediatric population. We compared the frequency of daytime GP contacts, consultations, and pain as a reason for encounter (RFE), in children with CP and the general paediatric population. Study Design: National registry linkage study. Study Participants & Setting: All children born 1996 to 2012, living in Norway in 2006-­2018, registered with a GP contact were included. A cohort of children with CP (cases) was compared to the general population of the same age (controls). Materials/Methods: Two national databases; the Norwegian Directorate of Health's database for the control and reimbursement of health expenses, and the Norwegian Quality and Surveillance Registry for Cerebral Palsy were linked. All daytime GP contacts during workdays were included, and consultations (physical or virtual meeting with a GP) were analyzed for pain as a RFE in three age groups (0-­5, 6-­11 and 12-­17years) using codes from the International Classification for Primary Care (ICPC-­2). Results: Cases accounted for 0.46% of all daytime contacts, and 0.27% of consultations. The latter corresponded with the estimated national CP prevalence of 2.5 per 1000 (95%CI 2.4-­2.7 per 1000). GPs registered more administrative contacts with cases than with controls. GPs coded pain less frequently in consultations with cases than with controls in the three age groups (RR 0.64 [95%CI 0.59-­0.69]; 0.41 [0.38-­0.43]; 0.53[0.49-­0.56]). The risks for codes indicating headache, and abdominal pain, were lower in cases than in controls in all age groups; (RR 0.46 [0.28-­0.76]; 0.34 [0.27-­0.42]; 0.39 [0.31-­0.48]) and (RR 0.39 [33-­0.46]; 0.31 [0.27-­0.35]; 0.62 [0.54-­0.72]) respectively. The risk that a consultation included a pain code grouped as "musculoskeletal pain" was lower in cases than in controls in the age groups 6 to 11years (RR 0.46 [0.43-­0.51]) and 12 to 17years (RR 0.51 [0.47-­0.56]), while there was no difference between cases and controls in the age group 0 to 5years, RR 0.94

 |39
(0.84-­1.05). In cases, Neurological disease, other (N99), was the only RFE coded in 7,199 (16.6%) of 43,302 consultations. Conclusions/Significance: GPs did not meet children with CP more often than controls, but they did more administrative work for cases than for controls. GPs coded pain as a RFE less frequently in consultations with children with CP than in consultations with controls. The latter could be explained by the tendency to code for the chronic condition (CP) only. Still, the results indicate that in consultations, GPs should ask for pain even if the child with CP or parent does not address pain. Further, the local multidisciplinary team should encourage the family to consult a GP if the child is in pain.
F7 | Altered Spontaneous Cortical Activity Predicts Pain Perception in Individuals with Cerebral Palsy
M TREVARROW1, A REELFS2, L OTT3, S PENHALE3, B LEW4, T WILSON5, M KURZ5 1Boys Town National Research Hospital, Omaha, NE, USA; 2University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA; 3Boys Town National Research Hospital, USA; 4University of Nebraska Medical Center, USA; 5Institute for Human Neuroscience, Boys Town National Research Hospital, Boys Town, NE, USA
Background and Objective(s): Cerebral palsy (CP) is the most common pediatric neurological disorder and is often associated with an increased reporting of musculoskeletal pain. However, the underlying neurological factors that contribute to this heightened pain perception are not well understood, which makes it difficult to assess and treat. Study Design: Cohort. Study Participants & Setting: The current study was performed at a university hospital setting. We utilized magnetoencephalographic (MEG) brain imaging to examine whether alterations in spontaneous neural activity (i.e., resting brain activity) predict the level of pain experienced in a cohort of 38 individuals with spastic diplegic CP (Age = 22.08 ±10.46 yrs., Females = 20; Gross Motor Function Classification System levels I-­IV), and 67 neurotypical (NT) controls (Age = 19.56 ±10.25 yrs., Females = 27). Materials/Methods: Participants completed five minutes of an eyes closed resting-­state paradigm while undergoing a MEG recording. The MEG data were then source imaged, and the power within the delta (2-­4 Hz), theta (5-­7 Hz), alpha (8-­12 Hz), beta (15-­29 Hz), and gamma (30-­90 Hz) frequency bands were computed. The resulting power spectral density maps were analyzed vertex-­wise to identify differences in spontaneous activity between groups. Participants with CP also completed the PROMIS Pediatric Pain Interference Scale, which assess how pain has impacted activities of daily living within the past seven days. Higher scores signify greater pain levels. Results: The spontaneous cortical activity was altered in the participants with CP in the delta, alpha, beta, and gamma

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

40 |
bands across the occipital, frontal, and secondary somatosensory (SII) cortical areas (all pFWE <0.05). Hence, this signifies that there is a general global disruption in the spontaneous cortical activity in persons with CP. Importantly, our results identified that the individuals with CP with stronger beta band spontaneous activity in SII tended to report an increased amount of pain on the Pain Inference Scale (r=0.44; p=0.039). Conclusions/Significance: Numerous animal and human studies have exemplified that SII receives nociceptive input from the spinothalamic tract, indicating that it is a critical area for pain processing. Thus, the increased beta spontaneous activity within SII for the persons with CP may be indicative of heightened sensitivity to the incoming pain signals ascending from the nociceptors. Overall, this highlights the idea that the heightened pain experienced by those with CP is not solely a product of abnormalities within the musculoskeletal system but may also have a neural basis that reflects differences in the underlying pathophysiology of pain processing. We suggest that changes in spontaneous resting-­state activity may provide a biomarker for identifying and charting the effectiveness of treatment approaches that are directed at remedying the pain experienced by persons with CP.
F8 | Health-­related Quality of Life in Adolescents with Cerebral Palsy; A Cross-­sectional and Longitudinal Population-­based Study
S LARSEN1, T TERJESEN2, R JAHNSEN3, T DISETH4, K RAMSTAD5 1Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Department of Paedatric Neurology, Division of Paediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway; 2Division of Orthopaedic Surgery, Oslo University Hospital, Rikshospitalet, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway; 3Division of Paediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Ullevål, Research Center of Habilitation and Rehabilitation Models and Services, Institute of Health and Society, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway; 4Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Department of Child and Adolescent Mental Health in Hospitals, Division of Paediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway; 5Department of Paedatric Neurology, Division of Paediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway
Background and Objective(s): Although health-­related quality of life (HRQoL) surveillance may be helpful in defining areas of health concern at population and personal level, assessment of HRQoL is usually not incorporated in surveillance of cerebral palsy (CP). The objectives were to investigate aspects of HRQoL in adolescents with CP, to define changes over a 5-­year period, and to identify possible predictors for HRQoL in adolescence.

ABSTRACTS
Study Design: Population-­based cross-­sectional and longitudinal observational study. Study Participants & Setting: Primary caregivers of 64 adolescents (male 59%), with bilateral CP in GMFCS levels III to V aged 12 to 17years (mean 14y6m, SD 1y5m) recruited from a surveillance program participated. Fifty-­eight participants (91%) took part in the longitudinal study. Materials/Methods: Two proxy-­reports, taken five years apart, included five of the six domains from the HRQoL instrument Caregivers Priorities & Child Health Index of Life with Disabilities (CPCHILD): (1) Activities of Daily Living and Personal Care, (2) Positioning, Transfer and Mobility, (3) Comfort and Emotions, (5) General Health and (6) Overall Quality of Life, and the questions on pain intensity and frequency from the Child Health Questionnaire (CHQ). The latter were transformed into a 0 to 100 pain score, where 100 represented no pain. Results: From childhood to adolescence, the mean domain scores decreased in General Health from 70 (SD 23) to 65 (SD 24) p=0.021 due to increased number of medications (p=0.001), but remained unchanged in the other four CPCHILD domains. Pain severity increased; CHQ pain score decreasing from 64 (SD 29) to 43 (SD 26) p<0.001. Severe motor impairment predicted low scores in CPCHILD domains 1, 2, 3 and 5, and more severe pain predicted low scores in domains 2, 3, 5 and 6. A low domain score five years earlier predicted a low score in each corresponding domain. Conclusions/Significance: An assessment of HRQoL should be included in CP surveillance programs because this could identify needs for interventions in individuals with severe CP. This study indicates the importance of improved pain management in both children and adolescents with severe CP.
F9 | Mental Health Disorders, Receipt of Mental Health Care, and the Relationship to Physical Activity and Sport Among Children with Cerebral Palsy
M KEKO1, C CRIBB2, S CREVELING3, H ROCHANI4, C MODLESKY5, G COLQUITT6 1Jiann Ping-­Hsu College of Public Health, Statesboro, GA, USA; 2Georgia Southern University, Statesboro, GA, USA; 3Center for Rehabilitation and Independent Living, Georgia Southern University, Statesboro, GA, USA; 4Georgia Southern University, Statesboro, GA, USA; 5University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA; 6Georgia Southern University, Center for Rehabilitation and Independent Living, Statesboro, GA, USA
Background and Objective(s): Children with cerebral palsy (CP) may be more likely to suffer from mental health disorders compared to Typically Developing Children (TDC). Physical activity may mediate the relationship to mental health and provide opportunities for social interaction with peers. The purpose of this study was to examine data from a nationally representative sample to explore associations

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ABSTRACTS
among the prevalence of current mental, emotional, developmental or behavioral problems, receipt of mental health care services, and physical activity and sport. Study Design: Cross-­sectional. Study Participants & Setting: Participants included parent respondents to the National Survey of Children's Health (NSCH) in the combined years of 2016 to 2020. Among 174,551 respondents, we identified 458 children with CP and 40,091 typically developing children TDC between the ages of 6 and 17. Materials/Methods: The 2016 to 2020 NSCH was conducted by the US Census Bureau online and by mail. Participants were selected with a validated, household pre-­survey screener and were asked to answer a child-­level questionnaire for a randomly selected child in their household. Outcome variables for this study were the presence of a mental health disorder (including mental, emotional, developmental or behavioral disorder), receipt of mental health care services, and physical activity (PA) and sport. Age, income, sex, race, sport participation, and physical activity were included as covariates. Multiple imputations were performed to address missing data. Logistic regression and chi square analyses were then employed. Results: Mental health disorders were more prevalent in children with CP compared to TDC (75.48% vs. 54.22%; p<0.0001). Among children with CP, 21.54% received mental health care compared to 14.64% of TDC (p<0.0001) and they were less like to participate in sport (32% vs. 66%; p<0.0001). While adjusting sex, age, race, and income, children with CP were 2.24 times more likely (p<0.0001) to have a mental health disorder but were 19% less likely (p<0.0001) to report a mental health disorder if they participated in sport. Participating in sports and performing daily PA decreased the odds of receiving mental health services by 35% (p<0.0001) and 23% (p<0.0001) among TDC, but was not associated with receipt of mental health services among children with CP Conclusions/Significance: Children with CP are more likely experience mental health disorders and receive mental health services compared to TDC. Sport is a type of physical activity that provides unique opportunities for social engagement that may positively impact mental health. These results should be taken into consideration when developing programs that increase PA and sport participation among children with CP. It is important both clinicians inform parents and caregivers on the potential benefits of sport and become aware of opportunities for adapted sport in their communities.

 |41
F10 | Parent-­delivered Infant Massage as a Stress Management Technique for Parents of Extremely Preterm Infants
D MCCARTY1, S DUSING2, R SILVER3, A GILBERT3, T O'SHEA4 1University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Durham, NC, USA; 2University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA; 3University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Durham, NC, USA; 4University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Durham, NC, USA
Background and Objective(s): In mothers of preterm infants, 60% develop depression and 75% develop anxiety during the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) stay. Infants born extremely preterm (EP), (<28weeks gestational age [GA]), are at high risk of death and comorbidities including cerebral palsy (10-­30%). These circumstances create a barrier to parent-­infant attachment which increases parent stress, and is associated with worse infant developmental outcomes. We developed the Therapist Education and Massage Program for Parent-­Infant Outcomes (TEMPO), a structured, physical therapist (PT) led program that trains parents to deliver massage and developmental interventions in the NICU. The goal of this project was to assess parent-­rated feasibility and acceptability of TEMPO. Parent-­ administered infant massage (IM) is well-­established intervention with multiple infant benefits. Emerging evidence suggests that maternally-­administered IM also improves mother's mood and decreases state anxiety. We anticipate that parent salivary cortisol (SC), a biomarker for stress, will decline post-­IM. Study Design: Prospective cohort. Study Participants & Setting: Dyads were recruited in the UNC NICU where ~100 EP infants are born yearly. Of these, ~75% will survive and ~57 will meet eligibility. We aimed to enroll 55% of eligible dyads, and therefore our sample size was 30+. Inclusion Criteria: Infant: <28weeks GA, <4weeks old. Parent: biological mother/father. Speaks English. Exclusion Criteria: Infants without biological parent available to consent. Infants with genetic/chromosomal abnormality or low bone density. Materials/Methods: Data was collected as part of a prospective single cohort study funded by the PI's NIH KL2 training award (3KL2TR002490-­02S1). Infants were screened for inclusion at PT referral and parents were approached for consent. IM was one of the main interventions in TEMPO and is the focus of this submission. Infants were generally able to tolerate IM at ~33weeks GA and ~1500 grams. While PT demonstrated ATVV protocol massage on a doll, parents massaged their infants. Parent SC levels were collected via buccal swab immediately before and after the 2nd IM session. Results: Of 32 enrolled dyads, 6 transferred to outside hospitals, 2 infants died, one mother declined testing, and one could not be present for IM. With the remaining 21 mothers and 1 father, results of a paired t-­test revealed a significant

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

42 |
difference in pre to post SC levels (18.01 ng/dl, CI=2.6, 33.5, p=0.02). The SC test could not detect values <50 ng/dL. Of 22 samples, 6 measured <50 ng/dl both pre-­and post-­IM. In 16 samples with SC >50 ng/dl, average percent change from pre-­to post-­IM was 20.1%, which exceeds the recommended 15.5% threshold to indicate true stress response. Conclusions/Significance: We anticipate parent-­delivered IM may reduce SC, and thereby reduce parent stress. Further study is needed in sufficiently powered samples to confirm findings.
Free Paper Session G: Tone Ma nagement
G1 | Collagenase Clostridium Histolyticum Decreases Muscle Stiffness in Cerebral Palsy: An ex-­vivo Biomechanical Analysis of Hip Adductor Muscle Fiber Bundles
V JOUMAA1, W HERZOG2, T LEONARD3, K ROBINSON4, R AKINS5, A ASMA6, J HUNTLEY7, M SHRADER8, K GRAHAM9, J HOWARD10 1Human Performance Laboratory, Faculty of Kinesiology, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada; 2Human Performance Laboratory, Faculty of Kinesiology, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada; 3University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada; 4Nemours Children's Health, Wilmington, DE, USA; 5FAACPDM, FAHA, Wilmington, DE, USA; 6Nemours Children's Health Delaware Valley, Wilmington, DE, USA; 7Sidra Medicine, USA; 8Nemours A.I. Dupont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, DE, USA; 9The University of Melbourne, The Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; 10Nemours Children's Health Delaware Valley, Wilmington, DE, USA
Background and Objective(s): In cerebral palsy (CP), elevated muscle fiber bundle stiffness has been reported to be associated with increased extracellular matrix collagen. We hypothesized that the targeted use of intramuscular collagenase clostridium histolyticum (CCH) would decrease the stiffness of muscle fiber bundles, and thus reduce contractures, in CP. The dose-­response curve for CCH in CP skeletal muscle has previously been established by our research team (350U/mL for ~50% decrease in collagen content). The objective of this study was to determine the change in passive stress generation for CP muscle fiber bundles after treatment with CCH. Study Design: Prospective cohort study. Study Participants & Setting: Children with spastic quadriplegic CP (GMFCS IV/V), scheduled to undergo adductor muscle release surgery for hip displacement, were enrolled in an IRB-a­ pproved study at a tertiary level academic children's hospital. Materials/Methods: Biopsy samples of adductor longus obtained intra-­operatively underwent biomechanical testing

ABSTRACTS
before and after CCH treatment. The testing protocol consisted of stretches of increasing magnitudes (%strain, 1, 2.5, 5, 7.5) held for 2 minutes. The primary outcome measures were the peak and steady state stresses measured at the end of the stretch, and at the end of the 2-­minute hold, respectively, and Young's modulus calculated from the slope of the steady state stress-­strain curve. The samples were submerged in a CCH (350U/mL) bath and incubated until a stress reduction of 50% was achieved at each increasing tissue strain increment. Wilcoxon signed rank test was performed to compare values at matched %strain increments between treatment and control groups (p=0.05). Results: Adductor longus biopsy samples (n=7) were available from 6 patients for biomechanical testing. Peak stress generation increased linearly at 5.1, 11.6, 23.0, and 37.8 mN/ mm2 before CCH treatment at each %strain increment, respectively. After CCH treatment, peak stress generation decreased to 2.9, 6.0, 11.0, 14.5 mN/mm2 for each %strain increment, respectively (p=0.02). Similarly, significant decreases in steady state stress were found at all %strain increments. Young's modulus decreased from 253 to 98 kPa (63% reduction in stiffness) after CCH treatment (p=0.02). Biopsy sample incubation times ranged from 16 to 45 minutes. Conclusions/Significance: This pilot study provides proof-­ of-­concept for the use of collagenase to decrease passive stress generation and stiffness in contracted skeletal muscle from children with CP. These early results hold promise for the potential use of CCH injection as a non-­operative treatment that promotes muscle lengthening. Future studies are required to determine the safety and efficacy of this approach.
G2 | Spinal Stimulation and Training Improve Gait and Spasticity in a Child with Spastic Diplegia
S SHRIVASTAV1, C CASKEY2, K BJORNSON3, K STEELE4, C MORITZ4, D ROGE5 1University of Washington, Bellevue, WA, USA; 2University of Washington, Bellevue, WA, USA; 3Seattle Children's Research Institute, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA; 4University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA; 5Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle, WA, USA
Background and Objective(s): Quantitative analysis of skeletal muscles in cerebral palsy is an important but unsolved problem. Ultrasound elastography is a group of diagnostic methods that allow visualizing tissue stiffness, measuring and displaying biomechanical properties of tissues. The aim of our study was to conduct a systematic analysis of literature on ultrasound elastography of skeletal muscles in children with cerebral palsy. Study Design: Systematic review. Study Participants & Setting: A literary search for keywords in the databases PubMed, Google Scholar, eLIBRARY was carried out. The inclusion criteria were nosology (cerebral palsy), age (up to 18 years) and the study design (original

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ABSTRACTS
ABSTRACTS | 103 study in ultrasound elastography of the skeletal muscle), as well as the availability of detailed information about the technical issues, demographic and clinical data. Materials/Methods: The final analysis included 20 publications. Patients with hemiplegic cerebral palsy were most often studied, with the healthy side used as a control, shear wave elastography was used more often, in which both share wave velocity and shear modulus were assessed, and linear probes were used more often. The most frequent anatomical objects were the calf muscles. Most often, elastography was used to assess the results of botulinum therapy, and demonstrated an increase in muscle elasticity after treatment. Results : Ultrasound elastography as a method of assessment of the mechanical properties of skeletal muscles in children with cerebral palsy cannot be considered suitable as a routine study at the moment. But the method showed promising results for the research purposes: all the publications we analyzed demonstrated significant difference in elastography indicators both when comparing with unaffected limb or with healthy controls. Positive changes were also detected after various therapeutic interventions aimed to reducing muscle tone and retraction e.g. botulinum toxin injections. Conclusions/Significance : The absence of a unified approach to muscle elastography in children with cerebral palsy was demonstrated, both for data obtaining and interpretation. In general, ultrasound elastography of the skeletal muscles in children with cerebral palsy is a promising method for qualitative and quantitative assessment of muscle tissue that requires further development. Improvement of technology, standardization of technique and measurements will further expand the usage of this method. Results: Ultrasound elastography as a method of assessment of the mechanical properties of skeletal muscles in children with cerebral palsy cannot be considered suitable as a routine study at the moment. But the method showed promising results for the research purposes: all the publications we analyzed demonstrated significant difference in elastography indicators both when comparing with unaffected limb or with healthy controls. Positive changes were also detected after various therapeutic interventions aimed to reducing muscle tone and retraction e.g. botulinum toxin injections. Conclusions/Significance: The absence of a unified approach to muscle elastography in children with cerebral palsy was demonstrated, both for data obtaining and interpretation. In general, ultrasound elastography of the skeletal muscles in children with cerebral palsy is a promising method for qualitative and quantitative assessment of muscle tissue that requires further development. Improvement of technology, standardization of technique and measurements will further expand the usage of this method.

 |43
G3 | Muscle Extracellular Matrix Architecture in Children with CP: dynamic Stiffness Is Associated with Lower Collagen Alignment and Impaired Knee Kinematics
R WOHLGEMUTH1, M VILLALBA2, V KULKARNI3, J DAVIDS4, L SMITH5 1UC Davis, Davis, CA, USA; 2Shriners Hospital for Children, Northern California, Sacramento, CA, USA; 3Shriners Hospitals for Children -­Northern California, Sacramento, CA, USA; 4Shriners Hospital for Children, Northern California and University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA; 5University of California, Davis, CA, USA
Background and Objective(s): Traditional targets for preventing muscle contracture in children with cerebral palsy (CP) have focused on the central nervous system or motor endplate, but recent studies have shown that CP muscle has higher intrinsic stiffness compared to controls independent of neuronal input. Changes in the extra-­cellular matrix (ECM) may explain the increased muscle stiffness seen in children with CP. In this study, we tested the hypothesis that changes in ECM architecture are coupled with changes in muscle stiffness and gait in children with CP. Study Design: Children with CP and typically developing (TD) children undergoing surgery at a children's surgical specialty hospital. Study Participants & Setting: Children with CP and typically developing (TD) children undergoing surgery at a children's surgical specialty hospital. Materials/Methods: Using specialized clamps to maintain muscle length and architecture, gracilis muscle biopsies from hamstring lengthening (n=12) were collected from patients with CP undergoing surgery. As a control for hamstring lengthening in children with CP, gracilis muscle was collected following hamstring tendon harvest in TD children undergoing ACL reconstruction (n=6). Multiple muscle bundles were isolated from each biopsy and stiffness was determined using a series of stress relaxation tests to 20% strain. Muscle bundles were fixed at in vivo length and imaged using second harmonic generation microscopy to visualize and quantify ECM architecture and sarcomeric structure. Muscle stiffness and ECM architectural parameters were compared between CP and TD samples and used in correlation analyses to detect relationships between ECM architecture and stiffness. For ambulatory children with CP undergoing hamstring lengthening (n=11), the impact of muscle stiffness and ECM architecture on knee kinematics was assessed using 3D gait analysis. Results: Contrary to our hypothesis, dynamic stiffness was not significantly increased in CP muscle biopsies compared to TD controls (CP:46.65kPa±43.29, TD:21.83kPa±19.39, p=0.1129), and there was no significant difference in collagen alignment between CP and TD muscles (CP:27.78°±4.470, TD:30.17°±5.566, p=0.3544). Nevertheless, significant negative correlations of CP muscle dynamic stiffness with both

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

44 |
collagen alignment (p=0.0211, R2=0.4274) and knee flexion range in swing (p=0.0076, R2=0.5654) were observed. Conclusions/Significance: Higher dynamic stiffness is associated with lower collagen alignment and reduced knee flexion range of motion. Further studies will aim to elucidate the mechanisms by which the ECM collagen alignment changes dynamic stiffness and knee range of motion, providing a novel target for therapeutics to improve joint and gait function in children with CP.
G4 | Effects of Repeated Botulinum Toxin Injections in Lower Extremity Muscles on Muscle Morphology and Functionality in Ambulatory Children with Spastic Cerebral Palsy: A Preliminary Study
K UZUN AKKAYA1, H AKKAYA2, S BEZGIN3, P ATALAN4, T FIRAT5, C YILDIZ6, B ELBASAN7 1Department of Physiotherapy and Rehabilitation, Faculty of Health Sciences, Gazi University, Ankara, Turkey; 2Department of Radiology, Ankara Training and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey; 3Department of Physiotherapy and Rehabilitation, Faculty of Health Sciences, Hatay Mustafa Kemal University, Antakya, Turkey; 4Gazi University, Institute of Health Sciences, Department of Physiotherapy and Rehabilitation, Ankara, Turkey; 5Faculty of Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey; 6SBU Gülhane Medical Faculty, Dep. of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, Ankara, Turkey; 7Gazi University, Department of Physiotherapy and Rehabilitation, Ankara, Turkey
Background and Objective(s): One of the disorders observed in children with cerebral palsy (CP) is abnormal muscle tone, and the most common tone problem is spasticity. Botulinum toxin A (BoNT-­A) injections are frequently used to reduce spasticity in CP rehabilitation. BoNT-­A injections can be administered as a single dose, and some patients require repeated injections. After repeated BoNT-­A applications muscle atrophy, loss of contractile tissue and decrease in muscle strength can be observed. The aim of this study was to examine the effects of repeated BoNT-­A applications applied to the gastrocnemius muscle of ambulatory children with spastic CP on muscle morphology and functionality. Study Design: Prospective cohort study. Study Participants & Setting: Nine children with unilateral and bilateral, ambulatory, spastic CP, aged 5 to 12years, who had previously been injected with BoNT-­A into the gastrocnemius muscle were included in the study. Children who had been injected once or twice before were included in one group; children who received 3 or more injections were included in the other group. Materials/Methods: Gastrocnemius muscle morphology (cross-­sectional area, muscle thickness, fascicle length, pennation angle) was evaluated by ultrasonography, muscle stiffness was evaluated by shear wave ultrasound elastography, and muscle vascularization was evaluated by

ABSTRACTS
Superb Microvascular Imaging method by a radiologist. Functionality of children with CP was evaluated with GMFM, time up go test, squat test and vertical jumping tests by a experienced pediatric physiotherapist. Mann-­Whitney U test was used to determine the differences in ultrasonographic and functionality values between two groups. Results: It was concluded that muscle morphology, muscle stiffness and muscle vascularization values were similar in both groups (p>0.05). The results of the tests performed to evaluate the functional status of children were also found to be similar (p>0.05). Conclusions/Significance: As a result of this preliminary study, it was determined that repeated BoNT-­A applications did not have an effect on the muscle morphology and functionality of children with CP according to the assessment methods we used. We believe that further analysis with larger groups may reveal more concise results.
G5 | Treatment-­emergent Adverse Event Profile and Tolerability of Repeated Doses of OnabotulinumtoxinA for Spasticity in Children with Cerebral Palsy: Pooled Results of Two Open-­label Extension Studies
M GORMLEY1, D FEHLINGS2, H KIM3, M BONIKOWSKI4, M BANACH5, F GUL6, J MEILAHN7, B RACETTE8, N HUANG9, X NIU9, L JAMES9, R DIMITROVA9 1Gillette Children's Specialty Healthcare, St. Paul, MN, USA; 2Holland Bloorview Kids Rehabilitation Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; 3Columbia University Medical Center, New York Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY, USA; 4MCN Zagórze Neurorehabilitation Department, Zagórze, Poland; 5Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland; 6UTSW Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA; 7Marshfield Clinic, Marshfield, WI, USA; 8Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA; 9Allergan, an AbbVie Company, USA
Background and Objective(s): Two phase 3, double-­blind, placebo-­controlled trials demonstrated that onabotulinumtoxinA (onabotA) was well-­tolerated and effective for the treatment of upper-­and lower-­limb (UL,LL) spasticity in children with cerebral palsy (CP). Open-­label extensions of these trials showed sustained improvements in muscle tone and global function with repeat onabotA treatment. The objective of this analysis was to evaluate treatment-­emergent adverse events (TEAEs) and tolerability of repeated doses of onabotA in the open-­label extension studies. Study Design: Pooled analysis of 2 multicenter, open-­label extension studies (NCT01603641, NCT01603615). Study Participants & Setting: Children who completed the double-­blind studies without protocol deviations and were not deemed at high risk with repeat injections by study investigators were enrolled. De novo patients with CP (aged 2-­ 17years) and elbow or wrist flexor or ankle plantar flexor Modified Ashworth Scale-­Bohannon (MAS-­B) scores 2 were also enrolled.

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ABSTRACTS

 |45

Materials/Methods: Children could receive up to 5 doses of onabotA (maximum 8 U/kg [300 U] in Cycle 1 and 10 U/kg [340 U] in Cycles 2-­5) over 60weeks. In both studies, children were eligible to receive onabotA treatment of the UL, LL, or both if clinically indicated. Retreatment criteria: MAS score 1+ in the target muscle group and 12weeks since last treatment. Discontinuation rates, serious and non-­serious TEAEs, including TEAEs suggestive of possible distant spread of toxin (PDSOT), were evaluated to assess long-­term treatment safety and tolerability. Results: A total of 580 children were included in the analysis. Patients were on average 7.4years of age, 56.6% were male, and 61.0% were white. Most children (389, 67%) received at least 4 onabotA treatments with a mean (SD) body weight-­ adjusted dose range of 6.7 (1.6) to 7.0 (2.3) U/kg across treatment cycles. A total of 167 children received 1treatment of 10 U/kg (or 340 U), 35 received 4 consecutive treatments of 10 U/kg at 10 to 14-­week retreatment intervals. Overall, 58 (10.0%) patients discontinued; most for personal reasons (33, 5.7%) and 1 patient (0.2%) due to an AE. In total, 374 (64.5%) patients experienced 1 TEAE; 217/580 (37.4%) during Cycle 1 decreasing with each successive treatment cycle to 99/389 (25.4%) during Cycle 4 and 23/164 (14.0%) during Cycle 5. The most common TEAEs were upper respiratory tract infection and nasopharyngitis. Serious TEAEs were infrequent (39, 6.7%), none were considered treatment related. Ten (1.7%) patients were identified with a PDSOT TEAEs: muscular weakness (7, 1.2%), constipation (2, 0.3%), and facial paralysis (1, 0.2%). After review, none were considered related to distant spread of toxin, and all resolved without sequelae. No new safety signals were identified. Conclusions/Significance: Repeated doses of onabotA for UL and LL spasticity were well-­tolerated in children with CP. The incidence of TEAEs decreased over time. No serious TEAEs were considered treatment related. Safety findings were consistent with the double-­blind, placebo-­controlled trials.
G6 | Contracted Muscle in Children with CP Has Increased Fibrosis-­producing Progenitor Cells: A Novel Finding from Single-­cell RNA Sequencing Technology
L HU1, M VILLALBA2, J DAVIDS3, V KULKARNI4, L SMITH5 1University of California, Davis, CA, USA; 2Shriners Hospital for Children, Northern California, Sacramento, CA, USA; 3Shriners Hospital for Children, Northern California and University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA; 4Shriners Hospitals for Children -­Northern California, Sacramento, CA, USA; 5University of California, Davis, CA, USA
Background and Objective(s): Muscle contractures are common in children with cerebral palsy (CP), but the cellular milieu that creates and perpetuates contracture is largely unknown. Skeletal muscle stem cells (MuSC) have

been shown to be decreased in contracture, but we hypothesize that distortions in other cell type distributions may contribute to muscle dysfunction. Our objective is to utilize advancements in single cell RNA sequencing technology to classify alterations in cell populations in children with muscle contractures. Study Design: Cross-­sectional study. Study Participants & Setting: Children with CP and typically developing (TD) children undergoing surgery at a children's surgical specialty hospital. Materials/Methods: Gracilis muscle biopsies were compared between children with CP undergoing hamstring lengthening surgery and TD children undergoing ACL reconstruction with hamstring autograft. Within two hours of collection, tissues underwent dissociation, primary cell isolation, and cryopreservation. Five samples were collected per group and the three samples with the highest cell counts from each group proceeded to sequencing using 10X Genomics chips and to production of a read count matrix using a Bioinformatics Core. R Studio and Seurat were used to ensure stringent quality control filtering, to perform clustering, and to analyze differentially expressed genes for classification. A two-­way ANOVA was used to analyze the percentage of cell types in each condition. Results: Following cell filtering, 980, 2893, and 8208 cells remained in the CP samples, while 3001, 3141, and 854 cells remained in the TD samples. Cells in each sample were grouped into one of eleven clusters, and highly expressed gene markers were identified in each cluster to distinguish between cell types. As an example, PDGFRa exclusively identified the fibro-a­dipo-­progenitor (FAP) cell cluster, an important progenitor of cells that produce fibrosis and scar tissue. A two-­way ANOVA test with Sidak post-­hoc test revealed that the percentage FAP cells in CP samples was significantly higher than the percentage of those in TD samples (TD 32.8% ±15.0; CP 53.8% ±15.1; p=0.0072). Surprisingly, no significant change in MuSCs was observed (TD 6.4% ±3.1; CP 6.0% ±0.6; p=0.0072). Conclusions/Significance: The use of single cell RNA sequencing has provided a robust dataset of cells that are altered in muscle contracture. Importantly, we have identified an increased number of FAPs in muscle contractures for the first time. Cells in the FAP lineage produce collagen, a key component of fibrosis and contracture. Future studies can elucidate the trajectories of FAP-­lineage cells, providing the possibility of additional therapeutic targets in the prevention and treatment of muscle contractures in children with CP.

46 |
G7 | Does Intrathecal Baclofen Therapy Decrease the Progression of Hip Dysplasia in Young Patients with Cerebral Palsy?
A ASMA1, A CAN ULUSALOGLU2, K ROGERS3, J HOWARD4, F MILLER5, M SHRADER6 1Nemours Children's Health Delaware Valley, Wilmington, DE, USA; 2Nemours Children Health, Wilmington, DE, USA; 3Nemours Children's Hospital -­Delaware, Wilmington, DE, USA; 4Nemours Children's Health Delaware Valley, Wilmington, DE, USA; 5Nemours Children's Hospital, Wilmington, DE, USA; 6Nemours A.I. Dupont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, DE, USA
Background and Objective(s): Children with Cerebral Palsy (CP) frequently have significant spasticity that may contribute to progressive hip dysplasia. The early treatment of spasticity may alter the pathophysiology and reduce the need for surgical procedures to treat hip dysplasia. Limited literature on selected dorsal rhizotomy (SDR) has reported a decrease in progressive hip dysplasia, but this procedure is more commonly done in patients with GMFCS II and III levels of function, who have less baseline risk for hip pathology. The surgical treatment of spasticity at the GMFCS levels IV and V are more typically with intrathecal baclofen pump (ITBP) placement. This study aims to evaluate the effects of ITBP therapy in young patients with CP on hip dysplasia. Study Design: Retrospective cohort (from a prospective data collection). Study Participants & Setting: All patients at a tertiary referral pediatric hospital with hypertonic type CP, GMFCS levels IV/V who underwent ITBP placement under eight years old with at least five years of follow-­up were included in the analysis. Materials/Methods: The primary outcome was an assessment of hip dysplasia as measured by the migration percentage (MP) at the latest follow-­up or the preoperative MP prior to hip reconstruction. Thirty-­four patients (ITB) were matched to a control group of 71 similar patients without ITB placement (NON-­ITB) based on GMFCS, tone pattern, spasticity, medical comorbidities, and hip MP at the time of ITBP placement. Patients with any hip surgery prior to ITBP placement, who had ataxic or hypotonic motor type, or who had SDR were excluded. Patients were followed for at least five years or until they had hip reconstruction. The hip with the worse MP at the initial evaluation was used for the analysis. The chi-­square and independent t-­test was used for statistical analysis, with a p-­value <0.05 set for significance. Results: The mean radiographic follow-­up duration was 7.03 (SD 3.4) years for the ITB group and 5.56 (SD 3.7) for the NON-­ITB group. There was no difference between groups regarding GMFCS level, tone pattern, hip x-­ray age, initial MP, and comorbidity score. The Ashworth scale for mean hip adductor and flexor muscles were significantly reduced following ITB therapy (preoperative mean of 2.6 to postoperative mean of 1.8, p=0.001). The MP at last follow-­up (or before hip reconstructive surgery) was not statistically

ABSTRACTS
different between groups (ITB: 36.2%, NON-­ITB: 44.4%, p=0.145). Rates of future preventative (p=0.25), reconstructive (p=0.58), and recurrent hip surgery(p=0.2) were not different between groups. Conclusions/Significance: This study demonstrates that the use of ITBP as an early treatment of spasticity did not alter the natural history of progressive neuromuscular hip dysplasia in patients with CP at highest risk for hip disease. This study reinforces the growing evidence that progressive musculoskeletal pathology in CP is multi-­factorial. Hip surveillance should be performed in all patients with CP, regardless of spasticity treatment.
G8 | Improving Outcomes: Development of a Pediatric Intrathecal Baclofen Database
C HARDESTY1, K BUXTON2, M JANAS3, E MEYER4, E DEL ROSARIO5 1Rainbow Babies and Children's Hospital, Hunting Valley, OH, USA; 2Boston Children's Hospital, Burlington, MA, USA; 3Rainbow Babies and Children's Hospital, Cleveland, OH, USA; 4American Family Children's Hospital, Madison, WI, USA; 5NYU Langone Orthopedic Hospital, New York, NY, USA
Background and Objective(s): Intrathecal Baclofen (ITB) pumps are used to treat severe spasticity and dystonia in pediatric and adult patients. Current best practice models for ITB therapy and registries focus on adult patients. Available pediatric literature generally consists of single-­center studies with small cohorts. Given the heterogeneity of the pediatric ITB population, a significant number of patients is required to make evidence-­based clinical decisions. The Pediatric ITB Network created a database to prospectively collect information on pediatric patients who are treated with ITB. We present an Institutional Review Board (IRB)-a­ pproved process of developing a multi-­center database including sites across the United States. Study Design: Qualitative research: this is the beginning of a large prospective data collection. Study Participants & Setting: Patients aged 2 to 26 receiving ITB therapy are included in the database. Enrollment occurs at the time of ITB pump surgical implantation or replacement. Currently four unique institutions are participating with additional centers awaiting IRB/Data Use Agreement (DUA) approvals. Materials/Methods: Patients are prospectively enrolled into a RedCAP database housed at a single institution. A five-­ member steering committee selected data points for the RedCAP database. Data points (150) are divided into four categories: Demographics (38), Trial Information (19), Surgical Information (57), and Pump Management (36). A validated quality of life (QoL) measurement tool (CPCHILD) is collected prior to surgery, at 3 and 12 months post-­operatively. Each participating institution must be approved by its own IRB and have a DUA. Consent is required from each patient.

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ABSTRACTS
Results: To date, four academic healthcare institutions have IRB approval and DUA agreements in place. As data collection began, the steering committee modified the data points to address previously unexpected needs. For example, a section on complications was added. Currently, 47 patients have been enrolled, including 27 males and 20 females. Sample data includes the following: the majority of patients have a diagnosis of cerebral palsy spastic quadriplegia (24), followed by other types of CP (6), spastic diplegia (5), or one of 10 other diagnoses, each with 1 to 2 patients. Trials were performed on 14 patients. Of the implanted pumps, 33 were 20 mL and 12 were 40 mL. The mean estimated blood loss for pump implants was 6.7mL (range, 5-­25). The mean time lying flat postoperatively was 26 hours (range, 0-­48). Conclusions/Significance: The steering committee is essential to the development of a complex database. As a result of data point enhancements, the current multi-­center pediatric ITB database offers rich potential information for future research. The addition of more institutions will increase volume and significance of data. Ultimately, the multi-­center pediatric database will allow for identification of pediatric ITB best practices and more standardized care.
G9 | Development of a Self-­assessment Questionnaire to Identify Dystonia in People with Cerebral Palsy
F JALEEL1, A RUST2, S CHEUNG2, T PEARSON3, K UEDA3, A VIEHOEVER2, K LEGER2, J WILSON4, D GUEZ-­BARBER5, M SHUSTERMAN6, B ARAVAMUTHAN3 1Wellesley College, Wellesley, MA, USA; 2Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA; 3Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA; 4Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, USA; 5Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA; 6Cerebral Palsy Research Network, Greenville, SC, USA
Background and Objective(s): Dystonia is under-­recognized in people with cerebral palsy (CP) but is often functionally limiting and requires targeted treatment. Efforts to improve dystonia recognition have focused on practitioners with less focus on how people with CP describe their own dystonia. Study Design: Cross sectional study with non-­consecutive sample (convenience sampling at in-­person clinic visits) with consistently applied reference standard. Study Participants & Setting: Children and young adults with CP (age 0-­21years, GMFCS I-­V) and their caregivers seen in CP clinics at two large tertiary care hospitals (Washington University in St. Louis and Oregon Health & Science University) Materials/Methods: We sought to: (1) Determine how people with CP and their caregivers describe dystonia; (2) Use this information to develop a self-­assessment questionnaire to identify dystonia in people with CP. Via a paper survey, we asked people with CP or their caregivers (at their discretion) to answer 2 questions derived from the Hypertonia

 |47
Assessment Tool and provide supportive examples: (1) When the person being evaluated today tries to move one body part, does A DIFFERENT BODY PART start moving unintentionally or out of their control?; and (2) During activities that involve others handling their body, does the person being evaluated today start moving body part(s) that are NOT BEING HANDLED BY OTHERS unintentionally or out of their control? We also asked their CP clinic practitioners (child neurology trained with CP and movement disorders expertise) whether the person with CP had dystonia and whether it was functionally limiting. Respondent-­given examples were consolidated into a questionnaire via iterative discussion between a child neurologist (BRA), an adult with CP (FJ), and a child neurologist and parent of a child with CP (DGB). This questionnaire was given to a new set of people with CP and caregivers. Responses were compared between people with and without practitioner-­identified dystonia to determine cutoffs maximizing questionnaire sensitivity and specificity for dystonia. Results: 116 people with CP (58 with dystonia, 50%) or their caregivers responded to the two initial questions. A `yes' answer to either question was 72% sensitive and 79% specific for dystonia. A `yes' answer to both questions was 40% sensitive and 97% specific for dystonia. Respondent-­given examples included statements like: "she stiffens up on transfers" and "when moving one leg, the other leg wants to move". These examples were consolidated into a 22-­item questionnaire administered to 55 people with CP (23 with functionally limiting dystonia, 42%) or their caregivers. `Yes' answers to >22% of items respondents deemed relevant to them yielded 83% sensitivity and 78% specificity for functionally-­limiting dystonia. Conclusions/Significance: These results demonstrate the potential viability of a self-­assessment questionnaire for identifying dystonia in people with CP. Such auxiliary dystonia identification methods could help address the important problem of dystonia under-­recognition in people with CP.
G10 | Effect of Single Event Multi Level Chemoneurolysis with AbobotulinumtoxinA on Energy Expenditure and Walking Efficiency in Children with Cerebral Palsy
H KIM1, H MATSUMOTO2 1Columbia University Medical Center, New York Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY, USA; 2CUIMC, New York, NY, USA
Background and Objective(s): Spasticity is the most common movement disorder in children with cerebral palsy (CP). Children with CP showed higher energy expenditure during walking compared to typically developing peers. This increase is due to combination of the mechanical inefficiencies during ambulation in children with CP caused by spasticity, muscle co-­contraction, limited range of motion,

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

48 |
muscle weakness and loss of balance. The aim of this study is to investigate the effect of spasticity management using AbobotulinumtoxinA (Dysport®) on the walking efficiency and oxygen/energy consumption of children with CP. We hypothesized that single event multi-­level chemoneurolysis (SEMLC) treatment to spastic lower limbs of ambulant spastic CP decrease energy expenditure during walking. Study Design: Prospective cohort study. Study Participants & Setting: Convenient sample of children aged 6 to 17years old, with spastic diplegic CP of GMFCS levels I to III at a tertiary academic medical center from March 2019 to March 2020. Materials/Methods: Patients were recruited to participate in the study at their standard office visits. Upon obtaining consent, they are invited to 4 study visits: baseline assessment, SEMLC treatment, 1-­month and 3-­month post-­SEMLC assessments. The assessment included energy expenditure measured by oxygen consumption (VO2), 6-­minute walk test (6MWT), gait velocity and degree of spasticity using Modified Ashworth Scales (MAS). Energy consumption was measured by VO2 using a wearable Cosmed K5 device during a 6 Minute Walking Test (6MWT), while a GaitRite Mat was used to collect data on gait velocity. The decrease or increase was evaluated by the minimal clinically important differences (MCID):6MWT= GMFCS I to II 20 to 36 m, GMFCS III 23 to 46 m; VO2=0.06 to 0.09 ml O2/kg/min; gait velocity=5.7~9.1%; MAS=0.45+/-­0.73. Results: Eleven patients with GMFCS I (n=2), GMFCS II (n=8), GMFCS III (n=1) were included. Dosing of Dysport ranged from500 to 1000 units (11.0-­23.1 units/kg). The average VO2 increased significantly more than MCID by 1.93 and 13.95 ml O2/kg/min from baseline to 1 mo (p=0.048) and 3 mo (p=0.074) post-­SEMLC, respectively. Although not statistically significant, the average 6MWT and gait velocity improved more than MCID by 12m and 26m, and 8.0% and 2.3% from baseline to 1 mo and 3 mo post-­SEMLC, respectively. Most of MAS significantly improved from baseline to 1 mo and 3 mo post-­SEMLC Conclusions/Significance: Unexpectedly, the study demonstrated the increase in VO2 after the post-­SEMLC. This may be due to improved gait velocity and distance and spasticity. This study reflects that BoNT-­A injections are beneficial for spastic children to improve aerobic capacity and fitness rather than increase energy consumption during walking.

ABSTRACTS
Free Paper Session H: Therapy
H1 | An Accelerometry Based Approach to Quantify Intensity of Hand Arm Bimanual Intensive Therapy (HABIT) and Performance Gains in Children with Unilateral Cerebral Palsy
S GARDAS1, C LYSAGHT2, A GROSS MCMILLAN2, S KANTAK3, J WILLSON1, S SURKAR1 1East Carolina University, Department of Physical Therapy, Greenville, NC, USA; 2East Carolina University, Department of Physical Therapy, Greenville, NC, USA; 3Arcadia University, Department of Physical Therapy, Glenside, PA, USA
Background and Objective(s): HABIT improves bimanual coordination in children with unilateral cerebral palsy (UCP). Historically, training intensity of HABIT is defined as the total number of hrs of therapy delivered. An objective method that quantifies bilateral upper extremity (UE) movements will accurately determine the dose of HABIT. Traditionally, the effectiveness of HABIT is determined as change in standardized assessments (capacity). However, evidence suggests that improvement in capacity doesn't translate to increased UE use in daily life (performance). Hence, it's crucial to understand if HABIT improves UE performance in children with UCP. Accelerometry is emerging as a novel method to quantify various characteristics of UE movements. Thus, the purpose of this study was to quantify training intensity of HABIT and assess UE performance gains using accelerometry in children with UCP. Study Design: Prospective, pre-­and post-­training study was conducted at a tertiary center. Study Participants & Setting: Twelve children diagnosed with UCP (mean age=11.8±3.5 yrs; 9M, 3F) and MACS levels I-­III. Materials/Methods: HABIT was delivered using structured bimanual practice in play context, 6 hrs/day for 5 consecutive days. During 30 hrs of HABIT, children wore the ActiGraph GT9X Link accelerometers on both wrists and data were processed using an established protocol.6 HABIT intensity was quantified using descriptive analysis of accelerometer derived variables: affected extremity use count (AUC), use ratio (UR), and magnitude ratio (MR), which quantify amount of the affected extremity (AE) movement, contribution of AE during activity, and movement intensity, respectively. To quantify UE performance gains, accelerometers were worn for 3days pre-­and post-­HABIT and assessed using UR, MR, median acceleration (MA), and acceleration variability (AV). MA and AV quantify movement intensity and variability. UE capacity was assessed using box and block (BBT), nine-­hole peg (NHPT) and Jebsen-­Taylor hand function (JHFT) tests. Capacity and performance gains were analyzed with paired t-­test. Results: Across 5days of HABIT, the average AUC was 13930±1257 counts/day (range: 12126-­15993), UR was

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ABSTRACTS

 |49

0.89±0.04 (range: 0.83-­0.97), and MR was -­0.58±0.21 (range: -­0.29 to -­0.85). Post-­HABIT, there was a significant gain (p=0.01) in all performance outcomes-­UR: pre-­0.74±0.13, post-­0.80±0.10; MR: pre-­-­1.85±2.0, post-­-­0.93±0.55; MA: pre-­20.57±13.93, post-­30.28±14.82; and AV: pre-­70.79±17.62, post-­79.80±15.57. There was significant (p=0.01) improvement in all capacity outcomes-­BBT: pre-­23±11, post-­26±11 blocks; NHPT: pre-­158.8±63.6, post-­112.3±42.8 sec; and JHFT: pre-­275.9±156.9, post-­193.8±94.1 sec. Conclusions/Significance: Accelerometry can objectively quantify HABIT intensity and may provide meaningful metric for intensive interventions. Furthermore, HABIT improves the affected UE use in daily life. Accelerometry may provide clinicians an objective measure to assess improvement in real-­world activities in children with UCP.
H2 | The Effect of Dual-­task Training on Gait Performance in Children with Cerebral Palsy
S BÜÜAN ORUÇ1, B ELBASAN2 1Gazi University, Ankara, Turkey; 2Gazi University, Department of Physiotherapy and Rehabilitation, Ankara, Turkey
Background and Objective(s): Dual-t­ask (DT) conditions are common in daily routines. Gait performance decreases during DT conditions compared to single-­task (ST) conditions in children with cerebral palsy (CP). The aim of this study was to compare DT training with ST training on walking performance in children with CP. Study Design: Randomized controlled trial. Study Participants & Setting: Twenty-­five children with spastic CP (from 7-­18years; level I-­II based on GMFCS E&R) who were capable of the cognitive task were included in the study. Children were classified randomly into two groups as study (n=12) and control (n=13). Evaluation and treatment of the children were conducted in special education and rehabilitation centers. Materials/Methods: The demographic information, the level of hand skills, and the communication function of the children were recorded. Children's walking time of 10 meters and Edinburgh Visual Gait Score (EVGS) was recorded in DT and ST conditions. For the ST condition, the children were asked to walk on the 10-­meter pathway at their self-­ selected walking speed. For the DT condition, they were asked to count backward from 100 (e.g. by twos, threes) during walking. Children in the study and control groups were included in physiotherapy and rehabilitation programs in special education centers. Stretching and strengthening exercises for lower extremity, strengthening exercises for trunk muscles, balance and mobility exercises were applied to both groups. In the study group, DT conditions were created by giving a cognitive task (e.g. rhythmic counting forward or backward, counting animal and fruit names, identifying the sound heard) during balance and mobility exercises. In the control group, balance and mobility exercises were applied

as a single task. Evaluations were made by the same physiotherapist. Physiotherapy and rehabilitation programs were applied in 2 sessions of 45 minutes per week and lasted for 6weeks. Paired t-­test and a Wilcoxon test were used to compare the values before and after treatment. p-­value (<0.05) was considered statistically significant. Results: According to the evaluations made after the intervention, in the study group, walking and EVGS performances increased under DT conditions (p<0.05). However, there was no statistically significant change in walking and EVGS performances under ST conditions (p>0.05). There was no statistically significant change in the control group (p>0.05). When the differences between the study and control groups are compared, it was deduced that balance and mobility exercises with DT conditions are superior to the ones with ST conditions with regard to the increase of walking performance (p<0.05). Conclusions/Significance: In conclusion, under DT conditions it was determined that the walking performance of the children in the study group increased. It is inferred that children with CP would be more successful in DT conditions that are frequently encountered in daily life by including DT exercises in their rehabilitation programs.
H3 | Efficacy of Neurodevelopmental Therapy in Cerebral Palsy: Systematic Review and Meta-­analysis
A TE VELDE1, C MORGAN2, M FINCH-E­ DMONDSON2, L MCNAMARA3, M MCNAMARA2, M PATON4, E STANTON4, A WEBB5, N BADAWI6, I NOVAK7 1Cerebral Palsy Alliance, The University of Sydney, Camperdown, New South Wales, Australia; 2Cerebral Palsy Alliance, Camperdown, New South Wales, Australia; 3The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia; 4Cerebral Palsy Alliance, Camperdown, New South Wales, Australia; 5Cerebral Palsy Alliance, Camperdown, New South Wales, Australia; 6Grace Centre for Newborn Intensive Care, Cerebral Palsy Alliance, University of Sydney, Westmead, New South Wales, Australia; 7The University of Sydney, Camperdown, New South Wales, Australia
Background and Objective(s): Bobath, or Neurodevelo­ pmental Therapy (NDT), is practiced widely despite longstanding evidence other interventions are more effective for motor outcomes in cerebral palsy (CP). Our objective was to determine the efficacy of NDT for any outcome in children and infants with CP or high risk of CP. We hypothesized that NDT is: (1) no more effective than control; (2) less effective than activity-­based approaches (3) less effective than body structures and function-­based approaches, and (4) no more effective at a higher than lower dose. Study Design: A systematic review and meta-­analysis using Cochrane methodology was conducted and reported according to Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews (PRIMSA).

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

50 |

ABSTRACTS

Study Participants & Setting: Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) with >75% participants with CP or high risk of CP which compared NDT with any or no intervention for any outcome were included. NDT vs. NDT plus an adjunct therapy, interventions not described as NDT, Bobath or neurodevelopmental therapy were excluded. RCTs with dosage <30 hours were excluded from dosage meta-­analysis. Materials/Methods: CINAHL, Cochrane Library, Embase and Medline were searched to March 2021. The International Classification of Functioning (ICF) was used to group studies by outcome. Meta-­analyses were conducted with pooled effect sizes reported using standardized mean difference. Quality, and certainty and strength of recommendations was assessed using Risk of Bias tool-­2 (RoB-­2) and Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE), respectively. Results: Of n=667 records screened, n=34 RCTs (in n=35 publications) with n=1332 participants met inclusion for systematic review. Of these, n=21 RCTs (n=667 participants) met inclusion for meta-­analysis. Of n=35 studies, 6/35 (17%) favored NDT, 2/35 (6%) partially favored NDT and 27/35 (77%) did not favor NDT. Four meta-a­nalyses were conducted assessing motor function outcomes. We found no effect between NDT and control (pooled effect size 0.13 [-­0.20, 0.46]). A large effect size favoring activity-­based approaches compared to NDT (0.76 [0.12, 1.40]) was found although the effect was reduced when norm-­referenced measures were excluded to account for heterogeneity (0.42 [-­0.08, 0.93]. A large effect size favoring body function and structures (0.77 [0.19, 1.35]) compared to NDT. Lastly, no effect between higher and lower dose NDT (0.32 [-­0.11, 0.75]) was also found. Overall, the body of evidence was rated moderate quality using GRADE. On RoB-­2, 11/35 RCTs were rated low risk of bias; 10/35 some concerns and 14/35 high risk of bias. Strong recommendations were made for the use of activity-­ based approaches in preference to NDT and against the use of NDT at any dose. The strength of recommendations were informed by evidence certainty, parent preference, benefit vs. lost opportunity and clinician preference. Conclusions/Significance: We found NDT was not effective for improving motor outcomes in infants and children with CP. We recommend against the use of NDT as a standalone therapy at any dose.
H4 | Efficacy of Ride-­on Toys Interventions in Promoting Upper Extremity Active Control and Independent Use in Children with Hemiplegic Cerebral Palsy
S SRINIVASAN1, N AMONKAR2, K SOUZA2, P PROMPRASERT2, D PATEL2, A AHMED2, P KUMAVOR2, K MORGAN2, D BUBELA2 1University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, USA; 2University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, USA

Background and Objective(s): The study investigated the efficacy of a novel intervention using joystick-­operated, ride-­ on-­toys to promote active control and independent use of the affected upper extremity (UE) in children with hemiplegic cerebral palsy (HCP). Study Design: Quasi-­experimental, single group, pilot study to assess effects of a novel intervention. Study Participants & Setting: Eleven children with HCP (Age range: 3-­13years, Means [SD]: 6.54 [2.76]; 6M, 5F; 8 right hemiparesis and 3 left hemiparesis), recruited through convenience sampling, participated in a single-­group, pre-­ post study that was conducted as part of a 3-­week summer camp to promote UE function in children with HCP. Children were excluded if they couldn't sustain supported sitting (<20 minutes), use their arm/body to briefly activate a joystick, exceeded weight limits of the toy, or had other additional comorbidities. Materials/Methods: Training involved daily practice (~20-­ 30 min./day) driving a modified joystick-­operated ride-­on-­ toy using their affected side. Activities involved navigation games requiring affected arm use to skillfully navigate through different paths while avoiding obstacles. Changes in the quality of UE movements were assessed from pretest to posttest using the criterion-­referenced, Quality of Upper Extremity Skills Test (QUEST). Caregivers also completed the Pediatric Evaluation of Disability Inventory (PEDI) to assess children's level of independence in functional activities. Finally, training videos were coded for changes in (a) % duration of independent versus caregiver-­assisted mobility, and (b) % duration of task-a­ppropriate versus task-­ inappropriate attention while driving the ride-­on-­toy, from an early to a late session. Results: Preliminary data suggest that children improved standard scores on the dissociated movements subdomain of the QUEST (Mean[SE]: Pretest: 29[2.9], Posttest: 37.9[3.1], p=0.006). Across sessions, children engaged in high levels of task-­related attention (~70% of time), but reduced the amount of device-­related attention (Mean[SE]: Pretest: 13.0[3.6], Posttest: 6.0[2.1], p=0.01) and increased socially-­ directed attention (Mean[SE]: Pretest: 6.4[1.3], Posttest: 13.7[2.8], p<0.01) from an early to a late session. These attentional trends are indicative of training-­related improvements in movement control and navigation, thereby allowing children to direct more attention towards social partners. From an early to a late session, children also reduced % duration of trainer-­assisted navigation (Mean[SE]: Pretest: 26.3[4.4], Posttest: 14.1[8.5]), and increased the proportion of active control of the joystick (Mean[SE]: Pretest: 73.7[4.4], Posttest: 85.9[8.5]). No training-­related changes were noted in the PEDI. Conclusions/Significance: Our preliminary data suggest that ride-­on-­toys may serve as motivating therapeutic adjuncts to promote self-­initiated, intense practice using the affected UE in children with HCP. Further research is needed to replicate our findings using larger sample sizes and rigorous study designs.

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ABSTRACTS

 |51

H5 | On the Move! Caregiver Perspectives on Power Mobility Devices & Participation for Children with Cerebral Palsy, Gross Motor Function Classification Scale Level V
B SLOANE1, H FELDNER2, L KENYON3, S LOGAN4 1Oregon Health & Science University/Oregon State University, Portland, OR, USA; 2University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA; 3Grand Valley State University, Grand Rapids, MI, USA; 4Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA
Background and Objective(s): Power mobility is beneficial for young children with disabilities to support mobility, communication, cognitive development, increased opportunities for socialization and participation. Children with cerebral palsy (CP), Gross Motor Function Classification Scale (GMFCS) Level V are often overlooked as a population who may utilize power mobility. This may be due to suspected cognitive delays, concerns for powered mobility `readiness', medical complexity, perceived dependence on caregivers, and stigma. Aim: Describe caregiver power mobility device preference between the Explorer Mini (EM) and a modified ride-­on car (MROC) including benefits, barriers, and perceived changes in participation. Study Design: This study is part of a multi-­site, mixed-­ methods, doubly counterbalanced, randomized, crossover clinical trial. Study Participants & Setting: The entire study included 24 children, 12 to 36 months of age with CP and their caregiver. This abstract reports on a subset of 8 children (mean age 23.25 months; 4 males; 4 females) who were identified as GMFCS level V by their caregivers. Materials/Methods: Each child completed an 8-­week trial period in each device, EM and a MROC, in a randomized order with no washout period. Assessments were completed at 0, 8 and 16weeks. This abstract focuses on a subset of semi-­structured caregiver interviews. Interviews were audio-­recorded, transcribed verbatim, and coded using the constant comparison method until thematic saturation was reached. Results: Device preference: Seven caregivers and six children preferred the EM. Themes emerged related to ease of use, positioning, and function. Participation: Benefits. Caregivers reported that both devices increased mobility and independence. MROC benefits included ease of transportation and use outdoors. EM benefits included ability to stand or sit and desirable device characteristics. Barriers. Caregivers reported that both devices had limitations in customized seating and steering. MROC barriers included lack of power and speed; and only moving in one general direction. EM barriers included challenges in transportation and space limitations. Perceived changes. Caregivers reported that their children used the EM in more variety of daily and family activities than the MROC. Other reports included: time constraints, continued goals for walking, and the pressure of another task to complete regardless of

device preference, which inhibited perceived changes in participation. Conclusions/Significance: Children with CP, GMFCS level V, were able to use both power mobility devices throughout the study with an overall preference for the EM. Caregivers reported several benefits and barriers related to both devices, but overall found their child successful in using power mobility for increased mobility and independence. Children with CP, regardless of GMFCS level, deserve equitable access to power mobility to promote age-a­ ppropriate mobility skills. Future research should include exploring how children learn power mobility skills using either a joystick or switch.
H6 | Qualitative Experiences of Physical Activity in Children with Cerebral Palsy: The Journey to Sustained Participation
G KILGOUR1, B ADAIR2, S STOTT3, M STEELE4, A HOGAN5, C IMM6 1University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; 2Grow Strong Children's Physiotherapy, Preston, Victoria, Australia; 3University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand; 4Australian Catholic University, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia; 5CP Society of New Zealand, Auckland, New Zealand; 6University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
Background and Objective(s): Inactivity is common amongst children with cerebral palsy (CP), with concerning health and well-­being consequences. To understand children' and their parents' perspectives on `being active', this study explored: (1) the experience of participation in a high-­ level mobility program (HLMP); (2) the role of sustained participation in physical activity (PA); and (3) the importance of remaining active for life. Study Design: Interpretive description qualitative research. Study Participants & Setting: Ambulant children with CP were offered a community-­based, HLMP, providing task-­ specific training for running skills (twice weekly for 12-­ weeks). Participants aged 7 to 18years, Gross Motor Function Classification System I to II were sought through advertising in healthcare and community settings in Christchurch, New Zealand. Exclusion criteria were any surgical interventions in the past six months. Materials/Methods: Children and their parents were interviewed before, after and nine months following the HLMP. Thirty-­eight interviews were coded, analysed and interpreted. Analyses were informed by study audit information, reflective journaling and team discussions. An interpreted description was developed. Results: Eight children (mean age 14years) and ten parents participated. Children and their parents report improved motivation, confidence and physical well-­being following the HLMP. Parents valued their child being active now and into adulthood for health reasons; whilst children focused

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

52 |

ABSTRACTS

on their future sporting aspirations, employment and transportation options. Sustaining participation in PA after the HLMP required children and families to navigate complex interpersonal, organisational, community, and policy environments. Core themes were: `Just Doing it', `Getting the Mix Right' (right people, right place, right time), `Balancing the Continua' and `Navigating the Systems'. The continua involved spanning personal feelings from `I'll try anything' through to `I'll do it if I want to'; and `It's OK to be different' through to `It sucks being disabled'. Children and their parents highlighted strategies and plans they considered important to promote sustained participation for life, including co-­designing, connecting with others and collaborating. Conclusions/Significance: Overall, reasons for PA participation differed between children and their parents; as did effective strategies for sustaining participation. There is a need for involvement of both parents and children. The journey of sustained participation was complex, dynamic and unpredictable illustrated by the children navigating their own waka (Mori canoe). Successful journeys are needed to help children with CP "stay on track" to sustained participation.
H7 | "He's a Little Bit Different, but He's Still the Same": Perspectives of How Autism Knowledge Influenced Peer Engagement and Inclusion at Mainstream Summer Camps
S THOMPSON-­HODGETTS1, A MCKILLOP2, M COUTURE3 1Department of Occupational Therapy, Faculty of Rehabilitation Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada; 2Faculty of Rehabilitation Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada; 3University of Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada
Background and Objective(s): Children with autism are at high risk of experiencing social exclusion, including in community programs. Educational interventions aimed at increasing peers' understanding of autism might support the social inclusion of children with autism. We explored perspectives of the influence of a brief peer-­directed autism education intervention on social engagement and inclusion of children with autism at day camps. Study Design: Intervention study; interpretive qualitative description. Study Participants & Setting: These data are part of a larger, mixed-­methods trial. Eight children with autism (all male, 4-­10years, ABAS-­2 composite median = 65.5, range 52-­78), their fellow campers, and camp leaders across eight-­ day camps in three Canadian cities (Victoria, Edmonton, Sherbrooke) participated. Materials/Methods: On the first or second day of camp, a clinician-­researcher delivered a 5-­to 10-­minute intervention to all campers and camp leaders at each camp. Individualized scripts, co-­constructed by the child (if able), their parent and the clinician-­researcher, included: (1) the

autism label, (2) how autism is experienced for the child, (3) description and purpose of unique behaviors, (4) favorite activities and interests, and (5) strategies to engage the child with autism. Interviews were done on the last day of camp to explore perceptions of if/how the intervention influenced how they engaged with and included the child with autism. Interview participants were three children with autism (8, 9, 9years), 32 peers (5-­12years), and 13 leaders. Interviews lasted between five and 25 minutes. Interview data were transcribed and analyzed thematically. Reflexive journaling was done throughout data collection and analysis. Analysis involved an iterative process of data familiarization, coding, and theme development. Results: Three themes were generated. Theme 1, "He's actually just trying to play with us": changed behavioral attribution, referred to increased tolerance for behaviors originally seen as atypical or socially undesirable because they were reframed as a part of autism, not bad behavior. Theme 2, "It was easier to relate to him": using strengths and interests to engage, referred to peers' and leaders' appreciation of a starting point to engage the camper with autism. Theme 3, "Kids were nicer to me": perceived increased inclusion, referred to perceptions that peers included the child with autism more following the intervention. Although some camp leaders used the term inclusion, the influence of the intervention on the relational aspects of belonging was less apparent. Conclusions/Significance: Should a child and parent be comfortable with disclosing one's autism diagnosis, a brief educational intervention that includes individualized explanatory information and strengths-­based strategies might be a simple way to improve peers' understanding of and engagement with children with autism in community programs.
H8 | Effects of Dance Interventions on Functioning of Children and Adolescents with Neuromotor Dysfunction: A Systematic Review
E LIMA1, B BRUGNARO2, S PAVÃO3, N ROCHA4 1Federal University of Paraná, Parana, Brazil; 2Federal University of São Carlos, São Carlos, Sao Paulo, Brazil; 3Federal University of Paraná, Sao Carlos, Parana, Brazil; 4Federal University of São Carlos, São Carlos, Sao Paulo, Brazil
Background and Objective(s): Dancing involves physical, psychological and social aspects, besides promote playful and positive involvement. It would be a therapeutic tool in rehabilitation of children and adolescents with neuromotor impairments (CANI), showing potential effects in multiple health domains. We systematically reviewed studies addressing the effects of dance as a rehabilitation tool in CANI, investigating: the measured outcomes in the studies, classifying it according to International Classification of Functioning Disability and Health (ICF) domains; the reported effects of dance on the addressed ICF domains;

ABSTRACTS
the methodological quality of the studies; evidence level of dance as a therapeutic tool for CANI. Study Design: Systematic review. Study Participants & Setting: CANI, 0 to 18years. We considered as neuromotor impairments medical conditions, such as, cerebral palsy, developmental coordination disorders, myelomeningocele, chromosomic syndromes with neuromotor impairments and neurodegenerative diseases. Materials/Methods: A literatures review was conducted (December 2021), in PubMed, Web of Science, Embase and Scopus following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-­Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines. Independent reviewers extracted data about study population, intervention features, and main outcomes. We classified outcomes according to the ICF framework. PEDro Scale assessed methodological quality. The Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) synthesized the body of evidence. Results: Twelve studies were included. The most of the outcomes addressed body structure and function and activity components of ICF. Only three studies addressed dance effects on participation, and only four addressed effects on personal factors. All these studies reported positive effects of dance on components of body structure and function, activity, participation and personal factors. Seven of them presented good methodological quality. Evidence synthesis show us moderate evidence level for improvement of body structure and function (postural sway, range of movement and strength in lower limbs, and pain) and activities (gait, rhythm, attention, functional balance and gross motor function). Conclusions/Significance: Besides the found positive effects of dance as a therapeutic tool, there is still limited evidence for its use as an intervention in CANI. Further randomized controlled trial (RCT) with higher methodological quality and larger outcome measures are needed to draw conclusions about the effectiveness of dance as a therapeutic tool. Nevertheless, the low evidence level dance in the domains of activity and body structure and function does not mean that dance could not be use as adjuvant rehabilitation tool for CANI, with potential benefits in participation and personal factors. Moreover, further RCTs should assess the effects of dance in CANI using outcome measures in all components of the ICF.

 |53
H9 | Using Prompting to Assess Engagement in Rehabilitation Settings
D DELFING1, K CHIN2, J RACHWANI 3, V SANTAMARIA4, C IMMS5, A GORDON6 1Teachers College, Columbia University, Brooklyn, NY, USA; 2Teachers College, Columbia University, Long Island City, NY, USA; 3Department of Physical Therapy, Hunter College, CUNY, New York, NY, USA; 4Mechanical Engineering Department, Columbia University, Department of Physical Therapy, International Institute for the Brain (iBRAIN), New York, NY, USA; 5University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; 6Teachers College, New York, NY, USA
Background and Objective(s): A video coding measure developed by our lab has been shown to be reliable and valid for determining visual engagement (VE) during rehabilitation. The measure uses predefined codes, to support objectivity, and can be used universally, as it is not limited to specific language or cognitive levels. However, coding VE is time consuming and requires training on how to use the codes, limiting its use by service providers. A more time-­ efficient way of examining engagement might be prompting. Prompting, known as re-­directive behavior, is considered a surrogate or indicator of engagement. The objective of this study was to examine whether prompting could be an alternative to investigate engagement in the rehabilitation setting using our video coding measure. We assessed prompting by coding the frequency and duration of prompts given by the service provider when the client was not engaged. Study Design: Prospective cohort. Study Participants & Setting: 49 children with unilateral spastic cerebral palsy (29 males, Age: M=9.28; SD=3.08) participated in 3-­week, 90-­hour intensive upper extremity day camps. Materials/Methods: To determine prompting and VE, pairs of children and interventionists were video-­recorded for five minutes each, for three activities (a standardized game, a child-­selected, and a part-­task activity (repetitive shaping) decided by the interventionist). Videos were scored using Datavyu©, allowing frame-­by-­frame identification of user-­defined events. For VE, raters determined children's gaze location (looking at activity, interventionist, or other) by watching the videos at half speed and coding continuously. Relative duration of each code for gaze location was calculated. VE was confirmed if the child looked at either his/her interventionist or the activity. Engagement of the child was also rated by the interventionist with the Engagement vs Disaffection with Learning Survey (EDL). For prompting, raters identified the times when prompting occurred, watching the video at half speed and coding isolated events. Relative duration and frequency of each prompt was calculated. Results: Children who were rated as being more visually engaged received fewer prompts per minute (r=-­0.414, p=0.003). Children who were rated as being more behaviorally engaged on the EDL received fewer prompts per minute

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

54 |

ABSTRACTS

(r=-­0.485 p<0.001). VE and prompting occurred significantly more often during part task activity than during the choice and standardized activity (p<0.001). Conclusions/Significance: Children's VE correlated moderately and negatively with how much prompting occurred. Coding prompting could potentially provide a more time-­ efficient way of determining engagement than coding VE. Prompting is only coded when the client is distracted, whereas VE requires continuous coding for the entire video duration. It was found that part-­task activity, a repetitive shaping task, required more prompting than the other two activities. Coding when and how often prompting occurs could therefore help providers determine which activities are the least engaging.
H10 | Reliability, Validity and Minimal Detectable Change of a Novel Power Leg Press Test in Individuals with Cerebral Palsy
M PONTIFF, N MOREAU LSUHSC-­New Orleans, New Orleans, LA, USA
Background and Objective(s): Individuals with CP have substantial deficits in lower extremity (LE) muscle power which impact daily activity and walking ability to a greater extent than muscle weakness. Few clinically feasible and precise measures of LE muscle power exist for those with CP. The purpose of this study is to determine the reliability, validity and minimal detectable change (MDC) of a novel power leg press (PLP) test to measure LE muscle power in individuals with CP. Study Design: Reliability and validity study for an outcome tool. Study Participants & Setting: Twenty-­six ambulatory individuals (adults: n=10, 18-­37 yrs; children: n=16, 10-­17yrs) with spastic CP (GMFCS I: n=4, II: n=19, III: n=3; Mean age 19.3 +/-­7.8 yrs) Materials/Methods: Participants performed 2 test sessions of 5 power leg presses separated by 2 to 10days at 40% to 50% of their 1-­repetition maximum on a leg press positioned at 29.4 degrees from the horizontal. The concentric phase was performed "as fast as possible" starting at 90 degrees of knee flexion and ending with full knee extension. A linear position transducer was attached to the weight bar, and the displacement, total load, and angle of the sled were used to calculate mean and peak power in watts (W) for each trial using Matlab. Intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC), standard error of measurement (SEM), the minimal detectable change (MDC), and the MDC percent change (MDC%) were determined for 4 measurements of power (average and maximum mean and peak power) for all participants (AP) and separately for adults (A) and children (C). Validity was evaluated against the gold standard measure-­isokinetic knee extensor power using Pearson correlation coefficients. Results: Test-­retest reliability was excellent for all measures of power regardless of group (ICC = 0.94-­0.99). The MDC/

MDC% for average mean power were 33.7W/19.8% (AP), 41.4W/17.7% (A), 27.6W/20.7% (C), maximum mean power 56.0W/29.4% (AP), 56.9W/22.3%(A), 54.0W/34.3%(C), average peak power 54.5W/15.5%(AP), 51.7W/10.7% (A), 53.4/19.0% (C), and max peak power 80.7W/20.8% (AP), 65.3W/12.5%(A), 79.8W/25.4%(C). Correlations were good to excellent between all measures of power and isokinetic power at all speeds (r=0.75-­0.88, p<0.001). Conclusions/Significance: The PLP test demonstrates excellent validity, reliability, and precision for measuring LE power in those with CP. Regardless of group, MDCs were low for all power measures, except for maximum mean power. Adults with CP had smaller MDC% on all 4 power measures compared to children. Low MDC scores reflect a more precise measure with little error which may be more sensitive to change. Average peak power was the most precise measure in both adults and children with CP, which means that a respective 10.7% and 19% increase in average peak power represents a true change in performance on the PLP test. The PLP test may enhance clinical exercise prescription and outcome assessment in individuals with CP by providing MDC values that must be met or exceeded in order to show true change in muscle performance after intervention.
Saturday, September 24, 2022 Free Paper Session I: Early Development and Intervention
I1 | A Systematic Review of Barriers and Facilitators Experienced by Parents of Typically Developing and Preterm Children During the Transition to School
A MORAWSKA1, A MITCHELL2, E ETEL1, T MA1, T MCAULIFFE3, R ARMSTRONG1, C MCBRYDE1, L JOHNSTON4 1The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia; 2Griffith University, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia; 3The University of Queensland, Lutwyche, Queensland, Australia; 4University of Queensland, St Lucia, Queensland, Australia
Background and Objective(s): The transition to schooling is an important developmental milestone for children and families and places new demands on the child. It is a sensitive period in development which has considerable implications for children's future school adjustment and success. However, while the literature has focused on children's academic readiness, much less attention has been placed on the ecological context of the transition to school. Importantly, there is a gap in understanding parent's views and preferences about their child's transition to school and their needs for support. This review aimed to examine the perspectives of parents of both typically developing children and those born prematurely to better understand both the challenges

ABSTRACTS
and positive aspects experienced by parents during the transition to school. Study Design: The review was conducted in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-­Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines. The protocol for this review was registered with PROSPERO (CRD42021222302). Study Participants & Setting: Studies were included if they met the following inclusion/exclusion criteria: (1) Any study design (e.g., case study, survey, longitudinal, experimental), and both qualitative and quantitative studies that were published; (2) Included parents of children before, during, or shortly after the transition to formal schooling; and (3) Reported on parents' experiences of their child's transition to school. Materials/Methods: Systematic searches of six electronic databases were conducted to retrieve published articles. The full search yield was screened for inclusion based on title and abstract, and full-­text articles were retrieved for studies that were identified as potentially eligible. Each potentially eligible full-­text article was then formally assessed for eligibility. Systematic data extraction was undertaken by a project member, who examined each full-­text record and used a standardised form to extract information on participant characteristics, such as study design, methodology, outcome measures, and results. The Checklist for Measuring Quality was used to independently evaluate the quality of the eligible studies. Results: Fifty-­eight studies were included in the review after full-­text screening. The majority (n=38) of studies used qualitative methodologies, with 4 mixed designs and 16 quantitative studies. Studies targeted both pre-­and post-­transition experiences, and all but two studies focused on typically developing children. We describe the results across four key outcomes including (1) parent-­reported challenges during their child's transition to school; (2) parent-­reported positive aspects during their child's transition to school; (3) parent self-­efficacy during their child's transition to school; and (4) other relevant parent experiences related to their child's transition to school. Conclusions/Significance: The outcomes of this systematic review pinpoint several important gaps in knowledge and have implications for supporting parents and children through the transition to school.
I2 | iMOVE (Intensive Mobility with Variability and Error) Trial for Toddlers with Cerebral Palsy
L PROSSER1, S PIERCE2, J SKORUP2, A PAREMSKI2, M ALCOTT2, A JAWAD2 1The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; 2The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA
Background and Objective(s): Cerebral palsy (CP) is the most common cause of physical disability in children. How best to optimize motor ability early in development when

 |55
there is the most potential for neuroplastic change remains unknown. The objective here is to report the results of the clinical trial (ClinicalTrials.gov NCT02340026) that tested the efficacy of a novel intervention designed to augment motor learning experiences, called iMOVE therapy, compared to conventional physical therapy to improve gross motor function in young children with CP. Study Design: Randomized control trial (RCT). Study Participants & Setting: Forty-­two participants with CP or suspected CP between the ages of 1 to 3years (mean age 23.7 months, 57% male, 64% White) were recruited by convenience sampling through our institution's outpatient programs. The study was conducted at a pediatric tertiary care center in a large US city. Materials/Methods: The study was a single-­blind randomized controlled trial. Randomization to receive either iMOVE or conventional therapy was stratified by age and baseline motor ability, such that no group differences existed at baseline in these factors (p=0.969 for age, p=0.227 for motor ability). The iMOVE group was intended to provide motor learning experiences more similar to typically developing children with high rates of child-­initiated movement, error and independent practice (distinguishing characteristics of each group will be detailed). Therapy was delivered at a dose of 30-­minute sessions 3 times per week. Repeated measures of gross motor function (measured by the Gross Motor Function Measure) and several secondary outcomes were collected by a blinded assessor throughout the 12-­to 24-­week intervention phase, and at three follow-­up points (3, 6, and 12 months) after the end of treatment. Statistical analyses of group differences were conducted using generalized estimating equations (GEE). Results: Thirty-­seven participants completed the study (Conventional group n=19; iMOVE group n=18), resulting in a retention rate of 88%. Average therapy attendance was 76% (SD 25%, with no differences between groups), for an average of 52.1 (SD 18.0) therapy sessions per child. Fidelity measures from behavioral video coding confirmed differences in motor experience between groups, including greater child-­initiated movement (p=0.0171), error (p=0.0043) and independent practice (p<0.0001) in the iMOVE group. Both groups changed over time in all outcome measures (as expected), but there were no group differences in change in gross motor function (p=0.9373), or secondary outcomes of postural control (p=0.856), cognition (p=0.0523), caregiver satisfaction (p=0.961) or child engagement in daily life (p=0.691). Conclusions/Significance: Despite the ability to manipulate motor learning experiences during rehabilitation therapy, the influence on outcomes is not yet clear. Secondary analyses will investigate patterns of motor experience in responders compared to non-­responders in study participants.

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

56 |

ABSTRACTS

I3 | Investigation of the Effectiveness of Family Collaborative Physiotherapy Programs Applied to High-­risk Infants
H ADIGUZEL1, Y SARIKABADAYI2, B ELBASAN3 1Kahramanmaras Sutcu Imam University, Kahramanmaras, Turkey; 2Sanko University/Faculty of Medicine, Gaziantep, Turkey; 3Gazi University, Department of Physiotherapy and Rehabilitation, Ankara, Turkey
Background and Objective(s): The inclusion of families in early intervention programs at early period may be more effective in ensuring their treatment adherence. Approaches including natural environment, enriched environment, interaction and family communication are more important in the rehabilitation of high-­risk infants. Objective: To compare the effectiveness of family collaborative approach (FCA) and Neurodevelopmental Therapy (NDT)-­based family training. Study Design: A randomised control clinical trial. Study Participants & Setting: The study included 63 high risk infants (F:27, M:36) hospitalized in the NICU of the university hospital, and referred to the physiotherapy program by a neonatologist. When the effect size was calculated as 0.61, =0.05, power as 80%, the sample size was determined to be at least 15 infants per group of three groups. Considering the losses in the physiotherapy and follow-­up process, it was planned to include 25 infants in each group. Therefore, the total sample was determined as n=75 high-­ risk infants (NDT group; n=25, family collaborative approach (FCA); n=25, control group; n=25). As there were losses due to the pandemic and other reasons, total of n=63 (NDT group n=21/FCA group n=22/control group=20) infants were completed the study Materials/Methods: 63 high-­risk infants with the mean age of 32.60±4.53 had early intervention for 12weeks. Prechtl's General Movements (GMs) Assessments, Hammersmith Neonatal Neurological Examination (HNNE), Hammersmith Infant Neurological Examination (HINM), BAYLEY-­III Infant and Toddler Development Assessment Scale (BAYLEY-­III) were performed. Results: HINM scores at 3rd, 6th, and 12th months (p<0.05) were found significant different BAYLEY-­III scores were significantly different at 6th (cognitive, language, and motor) (p<0.001) and 12th month (language) (p=0.031). Significant difference was found in terms of the HINM 6th month (p=0.034) in favor of the FCA group (FCA-­NDT), HINM 12th month (p=0.032) in favor of the FCA group (FCA-­ control) and NDT to control group (p=0.007). BAYLEY-­III cognitive, language and motor scores were significantly different in favor of the FCA group at the 6th month (FCA-­ NDT) (p<0.001, p<0.001, p<0.001) and in favor of the FCA to control (p<0.001), (p=0.004), (p=0.002). BAYLEY-­III language scores were significantly different in favor of the FCA group (p=0.024) to control at 12th month. Conclusions/Significance: Early physiotherapy interventions were effective in high-­risk infants and FCA program was superior to NDT.

I4 | Neuroplastic Changes in Response to Therapy Intervention for Preterm Infants in the First Months of Life: A Pilot Study
C BUTERA1, S BROWN2, C KELLY3, T DHOLLANDER4, D THOMPSON5, N LEPORE6, N KOZIOL7, B SARGENT8, J BURNSED9, M SHALL10, S RESEARCH11, S DUSING12, C RHEE13 1University of Southern California, Department of Biokinesiology and Physical Therapy, Motor Development Lab, Los Angeles, CA, USA; 2VCU Health, Mechanicsville, VA, USA; 3Turner Institute for Brain and Mental Health, School of Psychological Sciences, Monash University; Victorian Infant Brain Studies (VIBeS), Murdoch Children's Research Institute; Developmental Imaging, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; 4Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; 5Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Department of Paediatrics, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; 6CIBORG Laboratory, Department of Radiology, CHLA Departments of Radiology and Biomedical Engineering, USC, Los Angeles, CA, USA; 7Nebraska Center for Research on Children, Youth, Families and Schools, University of Nebraska-­Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, USA; 8University of Southern California, Division of Biokinesiology and Physical Therapy, Los Angeles, CA, USA; 9Unviersity of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA; 10Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA; 11SPEEDI Sites, USA; 12University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA; 13University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
Background and Objective(s): Infants born very preterm (VPT; 29weeks of gestation) are at high risk of developmental disabilities including cerebral palsy, coordination impairments, and learning disabilities. Infants born preterm, compared to full-­term, also show abnormalities in neural white matter characteristics, and problems with reduced postural control, movement variability, visual motor skills, and motor learning. Interventions such as Supporting Play Exploration and Early Development Intervention (SPEEDI) are associated with improvements in developmental outcomes. The purpose of this study is to explore SPEEDI intervention-­associated neuroplastic changes. We hypothesized a positive relationship between the intervention and neuroplastic change in regions associated with motor learning, specifically the corticospinal tracts (CST) and inferior (ICP), middle (MCP) and superior cerebellar peduncles (SCP). Study Design: Clinical trial. Study Participants & Setting: Five VPT infants were enrolled in a randomized clinical trial of SPEEDI (3 intervention and 2 control) participated. The SPEEDI intervention is designed to support the motor, behavioral, and cognitive development of VPT infants through a therapist, parent collaborative to enrich early life experiences during the transition from the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) to home.

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ABSTRACTS

 |57

Non-­sedated magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans occurred in the outpatient department of the Children's Hospital of Richmond. Materials/Methods: MRI scans were performed using a 3T Siemens Skyra scanner at term-­equivalent and 6 months corrected age. A typical fixel-­based analysis was performed, where all images were aligned to a study-­specific template, and fibre density (FD), fibre cross-­section (FC, in log form) and fibre density and cross-­section (FDC) values were computed and averaged across white matter tracts defined using TractSeg. Changes in FD, FC, and FDC in the left and right CST, ICP, MCP, and SCP were plotted and a Hedges g calculated. Results: Large effect sizes, (>0.8) were seen in FD for the left ICP and MCP, FC in the right ICP, and FDC for the left and right ICP and the MCP. Conclusions/Significance: Descriptively, the SPEEDI intervention group demonstrated greater change on average in FDC of the ICP and MCP, potentially indicating better information transfer in cerebellar peduncles. This effect was not seen in the FDC of the CST. These findings, while preliminary in nature, support the theory that daily intervention to enhance early motor and cognitive experiences in the first months of life, including SPEEDI, can increase the cross-­sectional area of neural structures related to early motor learning. Additional research is needed to confirm these findings in a larger sample inclusive of behavioral outcome measures.
I5 | Stability of the Motor Optimality Score (Revised) in a Cohort of At-­risk Infants
C PEYTON1, R MILLMAN2, S RODRIGUEZ3, V BARBOSA4, L BOSWELL5, R DE REGNIER6, A SPITTLE7, T SUKAL MOULTON8 1Northwestern, Chicago, IL, USA; 2Northwestern, Evanston, IL, USA; 3University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA; 4University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA; 5Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA; 6Lurie Children's Hospital, Northwestern University, River Forest, IL, USA; 7University of Melbourne, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; 8Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA
Background and Objective(s): The Motor Optimality Score-­Revised (MOS-­R) is a detailed scoring of the General Movement Assessment (GMA) and systematically measures the spontaneous behaviors of young infants. The MOS-­R assesses infant general movements, motor repertoire, age-­ adequacy of motor behaviors, postures, and movement quality and has been correlated with later gross motor functional abilities in children with cerebral palsy (CP) and with long-­ term cognitive, behavioral, and motor outcomes in children without CP. The MOS-­R is scored from the same dataset as the GMA between 12 to 16weeks corrected age (CA) -­a narrow assessment window. The stability of the MOS-­R at

various ages has not been reported but may be useful for clinicians screening infants in high-­risk follow-­up clinics. Our objective was to test the stability of the MOS-­R at 2 timepoints in a cohort of at-­risk infants. Study Design: Prospective cohort. Study Participants & Setting: Babies were recruited from four NICU centers in Chicago between August 2019 and January 2022. Recruited infants required a NICU hospitalization for preterm birth (<36 wks) or for other neurological risk factors. Materials/Methods: Parents of enrolled infants created GMA recordings using the Baby Moves app at 12 and 14weeks CA. Videos were reviewed by members of the central research team using the Prechtl methodology to score the GMA and MOS-­R. Infants were stratified by risk category into an increased risk group of infants born between 32 and 36weeks gestational age or a high risk group of infants who were either <32weeks gestational age or had other neurologic risk. A MOS-­R score of 22 or below was considered to be a less-­optimal score, whereas a score of 23 or greater was considered more optimal. Results: 176 infants were enrolled into the study and a total of 260 videos were submitted by the participating families. Of these families, 83 (47%) sent videos at two timepoints. 43/83 (52%) of these children were classified as having increased risk of adverse neurodevelopmental outcome and the remaining 40 infants (48%) were considered to have high-­risk. Among these children, 56/83 (67%) had MOS-­R scores which remained in the same optimality category between the two recordings. The remaining participants 27/83 (33%) had a MOS-­R score which changed in optimality over time. Of these participants, 15/27 (56%) improved to a more optimal grouping and 12/27 (44%) worsened to a less optimal categorization. The median absolute change in score was 2 points (IQR 2.75). There were no significant differences between groups of infants considered to have a high-­risk or increased-­risk of neurodevelopmental adversity in MOS-­R score stability. Conclusions/Significance: Within a two-­week period the MOS-­R was stable in a majority of at-­risk infants, however, in a third of the children, motor optimality stratification was changed, using a cutpoint of 23. Long-­term investigations are needed to determine how MOS-­R optimality scores are related to neurodevelopmental outcomes.

58 |
I6 | Clinical and Social Characteristics of Physical (PT) and Occupational (OT) Therapy Service Receipt and Dose Among Infants with Confirmed Motor Delays
B MCMANUS1, S DUSING2, N KOZIOL3, L HSU4 1Colorado School of Public Health, Aurora, CO, USA; 2University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA; 3Nebraska Center for Research on Children, Youth, Families and Schools, University of Nebraska-­Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, USA; 4University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
Background and Objective(s): Young children with neuromotor disabilities require rehabilitation and special education services to maximize their functional abilities. These services are primarily provided through Early Intervention (EI) programs, and governed under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act, or through outpatient services. However, it is not clear which infants access EI versus outpatient therapy (OP) or the clinical and social characteristics associated with access to and dose of therapy services for infants with neuromotor disabilities. The aims of the study are to describe (1) the rate of pediatric physical and occupational therapy service use (EI and OP) and (2) clinical and social characteristics associated with therapy access and dose in each clinical setting (EI vs. OP) for a sample of children with confirmed motor delays Study Design: This was a prospective cohort study within an RCT. Study Participants & Setting: Study sample included 108 families of infants (ages 7-­16 months) with confirmed motor delay across five states: Pennsylvania, Nebraska, Delaware, and Virginia. Materials/Methods: Study families completed a service questionnaire about frequency of receipt of PT and OT therapy in EI and OP settings as well as child's (i.e., severity of motor delay [measured by the Bayley-­3 motor composite] and corrected gestational age) clinical and social characteristics (e.g., child's race and ethnicity and SES). Proportional odds models estimated therapy dose (EI, OP, and both) controlling for infant clinical and social characteristics. Results: Overall, 13% received no therapy, 10% received OP therapy, 50, 28.2% .8% received EI therapy, and 25.8%L received both EI and OP therapy. In terms of therapy dose, 18.5% received less than 1x/month, 20.4% received 2 to 3 sessions/month, 33.0% received weekly sessions, and 28.2% received more than weekly sessions. Children with lower baseline motor skills (OR=3.3, 95% CI:[1.4, 7.7]), greater SES (OR=2.6, 95% CI:[1.04, 6.7]). and those living in Pennsylvania received the greatest therapy dose. Conclusions/Significance: Overall therapy dose was fairly low. In addition, social disparities exist with regard to EI physical and occupational therapy service dose whereby infants with lower socioeconomic status receive fewer services. These findings have important clinical and programmatic implications for mitigating therapy service access disparities and improving outcomes of infants with motor delays and their families.

ABSTRACTS
I7 | Variation in Developmental Measures Following Abusive Head Trauma in Infancy: A Systematic Review
C SARMIENTO1, J WYRWA2, A CHAMBLISS3, K STEARNS-­YODER4, A HOFFBERG5, A APPEL6, B BRENNER7, L BRENNER8 1University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Boulder, CO, USA; 2Children's Hospital Colorado, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA; 3Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA; 4Rocky Mountain MIRECC, Aurora, CO, USA; 5Department of Veterans Affairs, Rocky Mountain Mental Illness Research Education and Clinical Center for Veterans Suicide Prevention, Aurora, CO, USA; 6University of Colorado, Children's Hospital of Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA; 7Brandeis University, Waltham, MA, USA; 8University of Colorado, Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA
Background and Objective(s): Abusive head trauma (AHT) is a devastating cause of traumatic brain injury and death in children. Most who survive AHT have long lasting sequelae, though few studies examine the developmental outcomes that often result in long-­term, high-­resource health care utilization. To accurately synthesize data on developmental outcomes across studies, a systematic review was needed to evaluate the consistency of developmental assessment tools utilized to date. Our objective was to identify assessment tools used to measure developmental outcomes after AHT. Study Design: We conducted a systematic review according to PRISMA guidelines. Study Participants & Setting: Databases (OVID Medline, EMBASE, OVID PsycINFO, Web of Science, CINAHL, Cochrane Library, and Google Scholar) were searched since inception using controlled subject heading vocabulary and key terms for child abuse and head trauma. Inclusion criteria included original, peer-­reviewed study data; AHT exposure; infants <24 months at time of AHT; and evaluation of developmental outcomes. Materials/Methods: Two independent reviewers conducted title/abstract screening, full text screening, systematic data extraction using a pre-­specified form, and risk of bias assessment using the Effective Public Health Practice Project quality assessment tool for quantitative studies. Results: The initial search (up to 04/17/2020) identified 7602 references. After full text screening, 59 studies met inclusion criteria. Most were case reports and case series (n=37, 63%), and there was one randomized controlled trial. Across the 59 studies, a total of 115 assessment tools were used to evaluate developmental outcomes, constituting 53 unique types of assessment. Of the 115 assessment tools, 26% (n=30) were non-­standardized descriptions of outcome such as "hemiparesis" or "developmental delay". The next most common assessment tool was the Glasgow Outcome Scale (n=15, 13%), which is used to describe global developmental outcomes. Of the 53 unique types of assessment tools used, 68% (n=36) were only used once. While most studies described global developmental outcomes (n=53, 90%), many studies

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ABSTRACTS
also described outcomes in more specific developmental domains (n=37, 63%). Among the specific developmental domains, Gross Motor was most frequently included in studies (n=31, 53%) with Swallow/Feeding skills evaluated least frequently (n=6, 10%). Five percent of studies were rated low risk of bias (n=3). Conclusions/Significance: To date, developmental outcomes after AHT have been assessed with inconsistent use of a wide variety of assessment tools, which limits our ability to synthesize data and answer clinically meaningful questions. Developing and adopting consistent, comprehensive assessment approaches, particularly with use of existing data standards such as the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke common data elements, will help address this issue.
I8 | Assessment of an In-­clinic Quantitative Measure of Functional Upper Extremity Reach in Children with Brachial Plexus Birth Palsy
P CURRAN1, K WANG2, D WILKS3, E RIOUX-­TROTTIER4, N ALEXANDER5, D MCCOMBE3 1University of California, San Diego, Rady Children's Hospital, San Diego, CA, USA; 2University of Melbourne, Royal Children's Hospital Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia; 3University of Melbourne, Royal Children's Hospital Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; 4CHU Sainte-­Justine, Universite de Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada; 5Royal Children's Hospital Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
Background and Objective(s): Brachial plexus birth palsy (BPBP) is associated with significant upper extremity impairment. Quantitative clinical assessment is challenging due the complex range of motion and anatomy of the upper extremity. The Microsoft Kinect is an interactive video game system that may be used to measure upper extremity motion in the clinic setting. The purpose of this study is to measure volume of reach in affected and unaffected extremities in children with BPBP with the Microsoft Kinect. Study Design: Retrospective cohort study. Study Participants & Setting: Patients with brachial plexus birth palsy presenting to the Brachial Plexus Clinic at the Royal Children's Hospital Melbourne. Materials/Methods: Patients who underwent upper extremity motion exam with the Microsoft Kinect system in the Brachial Plexus Clinic were retrospectively reviewed. Motions analyzed included functional reach of the extremity and tasks to simulate activities of daily living (hand to head, mouth, chest, and belt). The functional reach of the extremity was determined by calculating the volume of reach of the hand node relative to the shoulder node within the Kinect skeleton using custom MATLAB software. Volumes were normalized by subject height for comparison. The relative position of the shoulder, elbow, wrist, and hand were assessed during functional tasks at the point of task achievement for

 |59
comparison. Patients underwent standard clinical assessments including range of motion and the modified Mallet classification. Standard statistical analysis was performed. Results: Twenty patients with BPBP (age 11.9±4.2years; 9 female; 14 right arm affected) were included. Fifteen patients had prior surgery. The normalized functional reach was significantly less for the affected (0.22±0.11 m3/m) compared to the unaffected extremity (0.39±0.11 m3/m). There was a strong positive correlation between height and reach of the unaffected extremity (r=0.89). There was a moderate correlation between functional reach in the affected arm and the total modified Mallet score (r=0.50) and abduction Mallet subscore (r=0.62). There was a significant difference between elbow position relative to the shoulder and wrist position during hand to head and mouth tasks. Conclusions/Significance: The functional reach of the upper extremity is reduced in the affected upper extremity and correlates with established clinical outcome measures in children with BPBP. The unaffected upper extremity reach is strongly correlated with patient height and may serve as a standard for comparison of affected extremity or predicted reach. This study describes the preliminary application of an easy to use, in-­clinic system for quantitative documentation and measurement of upper extremity motion in children. Future investigations will examine the use of this application to identify specific areas of deficiency and compare pre-­to post-­intervention outcomes in children with upper extremity differences.
I9 | Heart Rate Time Series Analysis for Infants in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit and Risk for Cerebral Palsy
L LETZKUS1, J BRANDBERG2, G LYONS2, K FAIRCHILD3, D LAKE2 1University of Virginia, Earlysville, VA, USA; 2University of Virginia, Earlysville, VA, USA; 3University of Virginia School of Medicine, Earlysville, VA, USA
Background and Objective(s): Atypical heart rate (HR) patterns in infants in the NICU can reflect central nervous system dysfunction and predict adverse outcomes. Our preliminary work analyzing a small number of conventional HR time series metrics identified several that added to clinical variables predicting later diagnosis of cerebral palsy (CP). Highly comparative time series analysis (HCTSA) of thousands of HR metrics has been shown by our group to discover previously unknown predictors of NICU mortality test the hypothesis that HCTSA of HR early in the NICU stay will discover new metrics for prediction of CP. Study Design: Retrospective. Study Participants & Setting: Patients admitted 2009 to 2019 to a level IV NICU were included if they were followed beyond age 2years and had at least 4 hours of HR data available within 24 hours of birth. Diagnosis of CP was obtained from medical records; control infants had no CP diagnosis.

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

60 |
Materials/Methods: For each 10 minutes of HR (collected at 0.5 Hz) metrics were calculated and analyzed for CP prediction in three time frames: 0 to 24 hours, 0 to 72 hours and 0 to 168 hours from birth. Four mathematical moments (mean, standard deviation, skewness and kurtosis) and more than 2000 HCTSA operations were analyzed. Unsupervised learning was used to identify clusters of similar HR features with a single central value (medoid). Top CP predictors from each cluster were also identified by Area Under ROC curve (AUC). Multivariate logistic regression was used to develop models and performance accessed using 10-­fold cross validation. Predictions were performed on individual 10-­minute records and also averaged by patient. Results: Eligible infants included 83 with CP and 1462 controls (Mean GA CP 33.0weeks, control 34.2weeks). The colored vertical lines show that AUC for HR mathematical moments, with standard deviation having higher AUC than HR mean, skewness or kurtosis. The top metric for predicting CP was "Diff-­uudd" which had elevated risk of CP when there were few patterns of the difference in two successive every-­2-­second HR values going up (U) and then two either going down or unchanged (D). Model performance increased with increasing number of days of data and by averaging values per patient. Conclusions/Significance: Using HCTSA we discovered a HR metric in NICU patients that reflects low variability and is more predictive of eventual diagnosis of CP compared to HR standard deviation. HR pattern analysis early in the NICU stay combined with known clinical risks could lead to better predictive models for CP which could be useful for stratification in clinical trials and for identifying infants for targeted testing and therapies to improve motor outcomes.
I10 | Motor Optimality Scores Are Significantly Lower in a Population of High-­risk Infants Than in Infants Born Moderate-­late Preterm
C PEYTON1, R MILLMAN2, S RODRIGUEZ3, V BARBOSA4, L BOSWELL5, R DE REGNIER6, A SPITTLE7, T SUKAL8 1Northwestern, Chicago, IL, USA; 2Northwestern, Evanston, IL, USA; 3University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA; 4University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA; 5Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA; 6Lurie Children's Hospital, Northwestern University, River Forest, IL, USA; 7University of Melbourne, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; 8Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA
Background and Objective(s): The incidence of adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes increases with each week of decreasing gestation in preterm birth. The Motor Optimality Score-­Revised (MOS-­R) is a detailed scoring of the General Movement Assessment (GMA) and systematically measures the spontaneous behaviors of infants. The MOS-­R assesses general movements, motor repertoire, age-­adequacy

ABSTRACTS
of motor behaviors, postures, and movement quality. The MOS-­R has been correlated with later gross motor functional abilities in children with cerebral palsy (CP) and with long-­term cognitive, behavioral, and motor outcomes in children without CP. Our objective was to compare the results of MOS-­R findings between 12 to 16weeks corrected age (CA) in a population of infants meeting criteria for high-­ risk follow-­up clinics with a cohort of preterm infants who do not meet traditional follow-­up criteria. Study Design: Prospective cohort. Study Participants & Setting: Babies were recruited from 4 NICU centers in Chicago between August 2019 and January 2022. Recruited infants required either a NICU hospitalization for moderate-­late preterm birth (MLP; 32-­36weeks gestation) or for high risk (HR) of CP including very preterm birth (<32weeks) or other neurological risk factors (abnormal head ultrasound or MRI findings). Materials/Methods: Parents of enrolled infants created GMA video recordings using the Baby Moves smartphone app between 12-­and 16-­weeks CA. Videos were reviewed by certified raters using the Prechtl methodology to score the GMA and MOS-­R. Infants were stratified by group into the MLP or into the HR group of infants who were either <32weeks gestational age or had neurologic risk. A binary grouping was created for the MOS-­R score; a score of 22 or below categorized as "high-­risk", and a score of 23 or greater was deemed "low-­risk". Results: 176 infants were enrolled into the study and a total of 260 videos were submitted by the participating families. 70 infants (40%) were included in the MLP group, and 106 infants (60%) were in the HR group. In the HR group 24/106 (23%) infants had an atypical GMA score and 5/70 (7%) of children in the MLP group had an atypical GMA score. Children in the HR group had 3.8 increased odds of having an atypical GMA score compared with children in the MLP group (p<0.01, 95% CI 1.38-­10.52) Children in the HR group had significantly lower MOS-­R scores (mean 19) compared to the MLP group (mean 24; p<0.001; 95%CI 3.3-­7.3). Infants in the HR group had 5.38 increased odds of having a high-­risk MOS-­R score (95%CI 2.1-­13.7, p<0.001) than infants in the MLP group. Conclusions/Significance: In our sample, the GMA scores and MOS-­R scores were significantly different among groups of children who were born MLP and those who were born with HR medical histories. This finding reflects the well-­known risk stratification of children's gestational age at birth and for infants with neurologic risk factors. Long-­term follow-­up is required to understand the correlates of early spontaneous motor behavior to the developmental trajectories of infants with various risk factors.

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ABSTRACTS
Free Paper Session J: Orthopedics
J1 | Identification and Treatment of Hip Instability in down Syndrome: A Scoping Review
R KOEHLER1, D GREGORY2, M GANNOTTI3, J MOONEY4, R PATHY5 1Boston University, Boston, MA, USA; 2Shriner's Children's New England, Springfield, MA, USA; 3University of Hartford, Shriners Hospitals -­Springfield, West Hartford, CT, USA; 4Shriners Hospital Springfield, Springfield, MA, USA; 5Shriners Children's New England, Springfield, MA, USA
Background and Objective(s): Hip instability is associated with Down syndrome (DS). The goal of this review was to examine the existing literature on hip instability in patients with DS as part of an effort to develop future hip surveillance guidelines similar to those established for people with cerebral palsy. Study Design: A scoping review following PRISMA guidelines identified English-­language, peer reviewed publications concerning hip instability or dysplasia in people with DS, including diagnosis and imaging, physical examination, other hip pathologies, surgical and nonsurgical interventions and epidemiology from gestation to adulthood. Study Participants & Setting: PubMed/MEDLINE, EMBASE, Web of Science, and Cochrane databases were queried with professional librarian assistance. Materials/Methods: Two independent reviewers screened abstracts and full texts. Discrepancies were resolved by group consensus. Studies were grouped by stage in life and content domains of epidemiology, morphology, diagnosis, or treatment. Validated critical appraisal tools were used. Results: 876 articles were screened, and 54 full text articles with case series, cross sectional and case control designs met criteria. 26 articles describe pelvic morphology in people with DS including increased iliac indices, iliac angles, acetabular retroversion, and global acetabular insufficiency compared to peers. Joint laxity and altered hip kinetics during gait are noted in school age children and adults with DS. Slipped capital femoral epiphysis (SCFE) and Perthes disease in patients with DS appeared to have worse outcomes than peers without DS. Large studies identified 28% of adults with DS with hip abnormalities. Sixteen articles reported on surgical interventions and outcomes among school age, adolescents, and adults with DS treated for hip instability and dysplasia with good outcomes. Periacetabular Ganz osteotomy and total hip arthroplasty procedures appeared to provide good outcomes for skeletally mature people with DS, but with higher complication rates than in people without DS. Conclusions/Significance: A scoping review of the literature demonstrates that the risk of hip pathology among people with DS is increased independent of life stage. In light

 |61
of this, early and regular radiographic and physical examination may be warranted. There are a limited number of studies regarding nonoperative management of hip dysplasia associated with DS. This review revealed mixed surgical outcomes and a variety of procedures. Consensus building among experts will be necessary to develop guidelines for hip surveillance and management for people with DS.
J2 | Automated Measurement of Migration Percentage in Hip Surveillance Radiographs: Development and Testing of a Deep-­learning "Artificial Intelligence" Algorithm
C YEH1, J KROGUE2, P DONAHUE3, M VILLALBA4, S JEON5, S YU5, V KULKARNI6 1University of California, Berkeley, and International Computer Science Institute, Berkeley, CA, USA; 2University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA; 3Washington University, St. Louis, MO, USA; 4Shriners Hospitals for Children -­Northern California, Sacramento, CA, USA; 5University of California, Berkeley, and International Computer Science Institute, Berkeley, CA, USA; 6Shriners Hospitals for Children -­Northern California, Sacramento, CA, USA
Background and Objective(s): Hip surveillance in children with cerebral palsy (CP) requires accurate assessment of the migration percentage (MP) on radiographs. Poor access to radiologists trained in the measurement of MP and inconsistent reporting of MP are barriers to hip surveillance implementation. This study aims to develop and test a deep-­ learning algorithm that automatically measures MP on hip surveillance radiographs. Study Design: Diagnostic study. Study Participants & Setting: We included anterior-­ posterior (AP) pelvis radiographs of children with CP between the ages of 2 to 18y undergoing hip surveillance at a referral children's surgical hospital. Materials/Methods: Radiographs were de-­identified and an online image annotation tool was used to label relevant pelvic and femoral landmarks in two steps for the calculation of "ground truth" MP. Participants were randomly allocated into three image sets: training (70%), validation (15%), and test (15%). Two convolutional neural network (CNN) deep-­learning models were trained to calculate the MP. The first CNN model based on ResNet 18 architecture was trained to calculate the degrees of rotation needed to level the pelvis, while the second model based on Cascaded Pyramid Network architecture was trained to detect the key landmarks for calculation of MP on the leveled image. The measurement error and the reliability of the deep learning algorithm on the test image set were calculated referenced against expert-­labeled "ground truth" MP. Results: A total of 1275 radiographic images from 588 participants with CP were identified for the study (53%M, 47%F; mean age at x-­ray 6.8y; 19% GMFCS I, 18% GMFCS

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

62 |

ABSTRACTS

II, 13% GMFCS III, 35% GMFCS IV, and 32% GMFCS V). The training (894 images), validation (186 images), and test (195 images) sets were comparable groups with no significant differences in age at x-­ray and MP (p=0.22 and p=0.69). The deep-­learning algorithm had a mean error of 8% SD 10%. Increased error was weakly but significantly correlated with increasing MP (R-­squared = 0.1, p<0.0001), but was not significantly associated with the presence of hip or spine implants (p=0.21). When a ground truth MP >30% is considered a "positive" case, the deep learning algorithm had a sensitivity of 70%, specificity of 94%, positive predictive value of 85%, and negative predictive value of 87%. The deep-­learning algorithm performed with an AUC of 0.923, indicating a model with excellent discriminatory characteristics. The deep-­learning model functions most optimally when an automated measurement of MP >27% constitutes a "positive case," with sensitivity and specificity reaching 85%. Conclusions/Significance: A deep-­learning algorithm can automatically determine MP with high accuracy. As a screening tool, the algorithm has excellent discriminatory characteristics, highlighting its role in a hip surveillance program. Further refinement of the algorithm using larger data sets will improve its generalizability for use in hip surveillance programs worldwide.
J3 | Evaluation of Alternate X-­rays to Reduce Hip Surveillance Imaging in Children with Cerebral Palsy
S MILLER1, C MATTHEWS2, J BONE3, J FARR4, K MULPURI5 1BC Children's Hospital, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 2McMaster University, BC Children's Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 3BC Children's Hospital Research Institute, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 4BC Children's Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 5BC Children's Hospital, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
Background and Objective(s): While risk associated with plain radiographs is low, efforts to limit lifetime radiation exposure are warranted. To reduce radiation exposure, x-­ rays completed for other purposes may be utilized for hip surveillance when the hips and pelvis are visible. This study aimed to evaluate hip positioning in alternate x-­rays and whether migration percentage (MP) measured from alternative images is consistent with MP measured on AP pelvis radiographs. Study Design: Cross-­sectional study. Study Participants & Setting: Children enrolled in a province population-­based hip surveillance program who (1) had an alternate x-­ray, defined as a non-­AP pelvis radiograph that showed the hips and pelvis, and (2) had an AP pelvis taken prior to or after the alternate x-­ray. All participant data up until January 2021 were reviewed. Materials/Methods: Radiographic data, including type and date of x-­ray, MP, and acceptability of the imaging, as

measured by degree of hip adduction/abduction from neutral and interforaminal ratio (IFR), were exported from the program's database. Alternate x-­rays were included if an AP pelvis radiograph was taken before or after the alternate image. The mean difference in MP and standard deviation (SD) of the difference were calculated between the two images; influence of GMFCS level and time between images were evaluated. Agreement was measured using Bland-­ Altman plots and summarized with the average difference and corresponding 95% confidence interval (CI). Results: In total, 50 alternate x-­rays were reviewed: 34 abdominal x-­rays, 8 standing hips to ankle x-­rays, and 8 scoliosis images. Images were from children at GMFCS levels I to V (1, 7, 3, 11, 28) at a mean age of 9yrs, 0mo (SD 4.0, range 1yr1mo-­16yrs2 mo). There were 69 AP pelvis x-­rays used for comparison. Hip abd/adduction was categorized as acceptable or borderline (12 degrees from neutral) in 49% of the alternate x-­rays and 80% of the AP pelvis x-­rays; it could not be assessed in 26% of alternate x-­rays and 3% of AP pelvis x-­ rays. IFR was acceptable (0.5-­2.0) in 80% of alternative x-­rays and 97% of AP pelvis radiographs; IFR could not be measured in 12% of alternate x-­rays and <1% AP pelvis x-­rays. The overall mean difference for MPs measured on 146 hips was -­0.26 (SD 7.27). Bland Altman analysis found a mean difference of -­0.26% (95% CI = -­1.4, 0.9) with lower and upper limits of agreement being -­4.5% (-­16.5, -­12.5) and 14% (12, 16). Conclusions/Significance: Positioning of non-­AP pelvis radiographs was acceptable less than 50% of the time but MP values were consistent between the x-­rays. Limits of agreement suggest not all images provide accurate measures of MP. The use of alternate radiographs may be appropriate for monitoring hip displacement while reducing lifetime radiation exposure and its associated risks and decreasing caregiver burden associated with repeated imaging.
J4 | Association of Race with Risk of Revision and Post-­operative Complications After Spinal Instrumentation in Children with Cerebral Palsy
L BROWN1, S TABAIE2 1George Washington University School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Washington, DC, USA; 2Children's National Hospital, Washington, DC, USA
Background and Objective(s): Neuromuscular scoliosis in children with cerebral palsy (CP) can become life threatening, and only spinal instrumentation and fusion is effective in halting progression and improving quality of life. The purpose of this study was to evaluate whether race is an independent risk factor for CP patients undergoing a spinal instrumentation to experience post-­operative complications, revision, and increased length of stay (LOS) in the ICU. Study Design: This is a retrospective cohort study. Study Participants & Setting: American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement Program (NSQIP) Pediatric database.

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ABSTRACTS

 |63

Materials/Methods: This study queried the NSQIP Pediatric database between years 2012 and 2019. Utilizing International Classification of Diseases Clinical Modifications and procedural terminology codes, patients with CP were identified for undergoing spine arthrodesis. Univariate analyses identified significant associations between patient demographics and comorbidities with race. Multivariate regression models controlled for confounding variables to assess race as an individual risk factor to undergo a revision arthrodesis and to suffer from postoperative complications. ANCOVA assessed whether there were significant differences by race group for the number of comorbidities prior to spinal arthrodesis. Kruskal-­Wallis H test was used to analyze LOS in the ICU, with post hoc pairwise comparisons using the Dunn-­ Bonferroni approach. Results: There were a total of 3,081 patients with CP under the age of 18 undergoing a procedure for spinal arthrodesis, including 1,715 (55.7%) Caucasian patients, 636 (20.6%) Black patients, and 730 (23.7%) Other patients. When controlling for comorbidities, race was not found to be a significant risk factor for undergoing revision spinal arthrodesis. However, both Caucasian (p=0.012) and Black (p=0.003) races were found to be independent risk factors for suffering postoperative complications, with Black patients having an increased risk compared to Caucasians (OR 1.322, CI 1.099-­1.590). Further, both Caucasian (p=0.005) and Black (p<0.001) races are risk factors for experiencing a medical complication, with Black patients having an increased risk compared to Caucasians (OR 1.373, CI 1.130-­1.667). The Kruskal-­Wallis H test showed that there was a statistically significant difference in LOS in days between race groups when ICU admission was required (H[2]=6.706, p=0.035). Pairwise comparison using post-­hoc Dunn's test with Bonferroni adjustments indicated Other races (Mdn=3.00) had statistically greater LOS than Caucasians (Mdn=2.00, p=0.029). No other differences were statistically significant. Conclusions/Significance: This study is the first to our knowledge demonstrating that race is an individual risk factor for pediatric patients with CP to experience medical complications following spinal fusion surgery, with Black patients having an increased risk compared to Caucasians. Further, Other races were found to have a significant increased LOS in the ICU postoperatively compared to Caucasians.

J5 | Pre-­operative Psychosocial Assessment in Pediatric Patients with Cerebral Palsy Decreases Length of Stay After Spine Fusion
C SEWELL-­ROBERTS1, E GILLOOLY2, N LENNON3, M SHRADER4, D KRAFT5, T BANJO6, J SALAZAR-­TORRES3 1Nemours Children's Health Delaware Valley, Wilmington, DE, USA; 2Nemours Children's Health Delaware Valley, Wilmington, DE, USA; 3Nemours Children's Health, Wilmington, DE, USA; 4Nemours A.I. Dupont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, DE, USA; 5MedStar Georgetown University Hospital, Washington, DC, USA; 6Nemours Children's Health Delaware Valley, DE, USA
Background and Objective(s): Caregivers of children with cerebral palsy (CP) experience significant stress surrounding orthopedic surgery with regards to their child's pain and recovery needs. This stress is exacerbated in families with little social support and pre-­existing socioeconomic stressors. A pre-­operative psychosocial assessment (PSA) can help identify stress risk factors and connect caregivers with resources to alleviate caregiver burden. This study examined the relationship between participation in a pre-­operative PSA and hospital length of stay (LOS) for children with CP who underwent hip or spine surgery. Study Design: Retrospective cohort study with a consecutive sample. Study Participants & Setting: In this retrospective cohort study at a tertiary care pediatric hospital, inclusion criteria were children aged 2 to 21years with CP, Gross Motor Function Classification System (GMFCS) Levels IV or V who underwent hip reconstruction or spinal fusion between 2017 to 2020. Forty-­six patients who met inclusion criteria and participated in a pre-­op PSA were identified and matched by age, sex, race, GMFCS level, medical complexity, and surgery type (hip or spine) to a group without PSA. Materials/Methods: Age, sex, and race were collected from hospital demographics. GMFCS level was by prior clinic assignment. Medical complexity was ranked (0, 1-­2, 3-­4) based on four issues: gastrostomy tube, tracheostomy, history of seizures, and nonverbal status. Pre-­op PSAs were administered by a social worker and included evaluation of family support, financial needs, transportation, equipment, housing, therapy, and other services. A stepwise linear regression was run to identify which factors influenced hospital LOS. Wilcoxon rank sum test was used to compare the groups with/without pre-­op PSA. Statistical significance was set at p0.05. Results: Results: The matched groups of 46 patients (with/without PSA) had no significant differences in age (10.8y/11.2y) sex, (M 28/21, F18/25) race (Caucasian 28/28, African American 13/13), GMFCS level (IV 17/16, V 29/30) type of surgery, (hip 28/28, spine 18/18) and CNS issues (zero 8/6, one or two 23/24, three or four 15/16). Stepwise regression (n=92) identified two factors with a significant influence on LOS. Pre-­op PSA (p<0.03) tended to decrease, and

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

64 |

ABSTRACTS

spine surgery (p<0.005) tended to increase LOS. Wilcoxon paired analysis was significant (p=0.000228) for shorter median LOS in spine surgery patients with pre-­op PSA (7days) vs without (12.5). There was no difference (p=0.507) in LOS for hip surgery patients with pre-­op PSA (6days) vs without (6days). Conclusions/Significance: Completion of a pre-­op PSA for youth with CP was associated with a significantly decreased hospital LOS in patients who underwent spine surgery at our institution. The reasons for the improved LOS in the spine group but not the hip surgery group are unclear and need further investigation. Our findings suggest that the clinical practice of identifying and addressing psychosocial needs of patients and caregivers prior to surgery can lead to more timely discharge.
J6 | The Effect of Dual-­attending Surgeons on Resource Utilization and Post-­operative Outcomes in Single Event Multilevel Surgery (SEMLS) in Children with Cerebral Palsy (CP)
M MO1, P MILLER1, S PATHANGEY2, B SNYDER1, C WATKINS3, B SHORE4 1Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA; 2Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA; 3Boston Children's Hospital, Dedham, MA, USA; 4Harvard Medical School, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
Background and Objective(s): SEMLS has been accepted as the standard of care for the treatment of lower extremity orthopedic pathology in children with CP. However, little has been studied on the effect of dual-a­ ttending surgeons in SEMLS for children with CP. The use of dual-­attending surgeons in other areas of orthopedics have resulted in decreased complication rates, operative time and length of stay. Therefore, the aim of this study was to compare the effect of single versus dual-­attending surgeons on resource utilization and postoperative outcomes in children with CP undergoing SEMLS. Study Design: Retrospective cohort study. Study Participants & Setting: 70 patients with CP or CP-­ like conditions, who were <20years old, and who underwent SEMLS at a single institution, were identified. Materials/Methods: Patients were stratified into single versus dual surgeon cohorts. Bivariate comparisons were conducted using Student's t-­tests, Mann-­Whitney U-­tests, and chi-­squared tests. Stratified analyses were conducted within patient characteristic subgroups to compare operative time within groups. Multivariable regression analyses were used to assess differences in operative or postoperative outcomes across surgeon cohorts while controlling for potential confounding factors. Results: The dual surgeon and single surgeon cohorts were composed of 43% (n=30) and 57% (n=40) of patients, respectively. When comparing the cohorts, no significant differences were detected with respect to age, sex, race, BMI,

GMFCS level, or ASA level. In the dual surgeon cohort, there were a higher proportion of patients with a seizure history (67% vs 38%; p=0.03) and those undergoing revision procedures (33% vs 3%; p=0.001). Bivariate analysis demonstrated that GMFCS level IV/V patients (269.6±46.7 vs 356±103.4 min; p=0.002) and those undergoing hip reconstruction procedures (270.6±53.2 vs 337.4±85.8 min; p=0.007) had a significant effect on operative time -­with shorter operative times noted in the dual surgeon cohort compared to the single surgeon cohort. No differences were noted between the two cohorts in estimated blood loss (p=0.23), postoperative transfusion rates (p=0.51), amount of cell saver spun (p=0.32), fluoroscopy use (p=0.52), operative time in lower extremity procedures (p=0.85), or length of stay (p=0.82). When controlling for age, GMFCS level, BMI, procedure type, and number of procedures, multivariable analysis demonstrated that procedures conducted in the dual surgeon cohort had a 50-­minute average reduction in operative time compared to the single surgeon cohort (p=0.005). No differences were found in complication rates, unplanned clinic visits, or re-­operation, even when controlling for confounding factors. Conclusions/Significance: These data suggest that for children with CP undergoing SEMLS, a team approach consisting of dual-­attending surgeons can significantly reduce operative time, particularly for higher GMFCS level patients and patients undergoing hip reconstruction procedures. Further study is needed to more accurately compare the outcomes between these two cohorts.
J7 | Anterior Distal Femoral Hemiepiphysiodesis in Children with Fixed Knee Flexion Deformities: Does Screw Location Matter?
S SETH1, P MILLER2, C WATKINS3, B SHORE4 1Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada; 2Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA; 3Boston Children's Hospital, Dedham, MA, USA; 4Harvard Medical School, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
Background and Objective(s): In children with neuromuscular conditions, fixed knee flexion deformities (FKFDs) can result in progressive crouch gait, limiting mobility and independence. Anterior distal femoral hemiepiphysiodesis (ADFH) using transphyseal screws is a guided growth technique used to correct FKFDs in skeletally immature patients. Despite promising outcomes there remains a lack of understanding of the technical elements of the procedure important for achieving success. The objective of this study was to determine whether the sagittal position of the screws used in ADFH affects the amount of physeal change over time. Study Design: Retrospective case series. Study Participants & Setting: This study included 36 pediatric patients with neuromuscular disorders treated for a FKFD using a transphyseal two-­screw ADFH technique at a

ABSTRACTS
single pediatric hospital from 2013 to 2020. The most common primary diagnosis was cerebral palsy (n=25, 69.4%), median age at time of surgery was 11.2years (SD 2.8), and most patients had bilateral surgery (n=32, 88.9%). Materials/Methods: Using ICD-­10 diagnostic and procedural codes, the institutional electronic medical record was queried to identify all patients who had undergone a transphyseal two-­screw ADFH procedure for a FKFD since the technique had been introduced. Patient charts were reviewed to collect data on patient demographics. Radiographs were reviewed to evaluate sagittal screw position and the change in the physeal angle over time. The position of the two screws were classified as either being both in the anterior third of the physis (AA), one screw in the anterior third and the other screw in the middle third (AM), or both screws in the middle third of the physis (MM). Results: The study population included 68 knees in 36 patients. The mean physeal angle at the time of surgery was 93.5° (SD 3.5°), which increased to 102.5° (SD 5.7°) at 12 months, for a change of 9° (95% CI 7.5-­10.5°, p<0.001). At 24 months, the mean physeal angle was 105.6° (SD 6.2°) for a further change of 3.1° (95% 1.5-­4.8°, p=0.001). When stratified by screw position all screw alignments resulted in an increase in physeal angle at 12 months. At 24 months follow­up, the physeal angle in knees with AA screws continued to increase another 3.5° (95% CI 1.1-­5.8°, p<0.05). However, there was no significant change in knees with AM screws (1.47°, 95% CI -­2.8 to 5.7°, p>0.05) and knees with MM screws saw a reversal of physeal angle change (-­7.1°, 95% CI -­11.9 to -­2.2, p<0.05). Conclusions/Significance: A transphyseal two-­ screw ADFH procedure results in a change in the physeal angle of 9° in the first postoperative year. However, there is a slowing of physeal angle change after 12 months, with screws placed in the middle third of the physis reversing physeal change. This is the first study to demonstrate the influence of sagittal screw positioning on the change in the distal femoral physeal angle following an ADFH procedure, highlighting the importance of proper surgical technique to achieve good outcomes.
J8 | The First North American Hip Surveillance Program: Enrollment After 5Years
S MILLER1, J FARR2, K MULPURI3 1BC Children's Hospital, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 2BC Children's Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 3BC Children's Hospital, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
Background and Objective(s): The Child Health BC Hip Surveillance Program for Children with Cerebral Palsy (CP) is the first province or statewide hip surveillance program in North America. Here we report on the population enrolled and incidence of hip displacement and dislocation in the first 5years of the program.

 |65
Study Design: Cohort study. Study Participants & Setting: All children with CP enrolled in the province's population based hip surveillance program. All children living in BC born in the years 2000 to present are eligible for the program. Materials/Methods: Clinical exam, radiological exam, and surgical data for all children enrolled up until August 31, 2021, five years from full provincial enrollment, were exported from the program's data management system. Presence of hip displacement and dislocation were reviewed for all the enrolled. Results: In total, 1191 children (56% male) have been enrolled with 256 (21%) at GMFCS level I, 289 (24%) level II, 131 (11%) level III, 250 (21%) level IV, 239 (20%) level V and 26 (2%) unknown/unclassified. Of these, 834 (70%) continue under active surveillance, the remainder having been discharged. At enrollment, 724 (61%) were identified as having a CP diagnosis, 154 (13%) possible CP, and 303 (25%) as `Other". Total enrollment represents 75.0% of expected children born between 2010 and 2019 and 59.8% of children born between 2000 and 2009 based on population and prevalence data. For those born 2010 to 2019, 60% of children expected at GMFCS levels I and II, 74% of level III, and 100% of levels IV and V have been enrolled. Migration percentage >30% has been found in 36% of the cohort and was related to GMFCS. At enrollment, 55% of children had been seen by a pediatric orthopaedic surgeon; 125 children (10%) have required a referral or re-­referred to a pediatric orthopaedic surgeon. In total, 17 children presented with a hip dislocation (mean age 10.2years, SD 4.3), the youngest being 2.2years. In 11 of these children reconstructive surgery was deemed not possible due to the health of the child or loss of cartilage/femoral head deformity (mean age 12.9, SD 1.9). All children under 10years underwent reconstructive surgery except one who was treated for joint effusions. Eleven children progressed to dislocation (mean age 7.7years, SD 4.6) on surveillance; two required salvage surgery at a mean age 15.0years. Conclusions/Significance: Incidence of hip displacement are similar to other population-­based programs. The program has been successful at identifying younger children who are at highest risk for hip displacement and referring to orthopaedics to prevent salvage surgery. No child identified with hip dislocation prior to age 10years and medically able to undergo surgery, has required salvage surgery. This program, like others, has demonstrated dramatic reduction in hip dislocations and need for salvage surgery.

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

66 |
J9 | Foot Drop After Surgery for Equinus Deformity in Ambulant Children with Cerebral Palsy
N SCLAVOS1, P THOMASON2, E PASSMORE3, K GRAHAM4, E RUTZ5 1The University of Melbourne, The Royal Children's Hospital, Carlton North, Victoria, Australia; 2Royal Children's Hospital, Blackburn North, Victoria, Australia; 3Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia; 4The University of Melbourne, The Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; 5The University of Melbourne, The Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
Background and Objective(s): Gastrocsoleus lengthening (GSL) is a common surgical procedure to treat equinus gait in ambulant children with cerebral palsy. "Foot drop", where the ankle remains in plantarflexion during the swing phase of gait, may persist after surgery. This may be related to reduced strength and selective motor control in the ankle dorsiflexor muscles. Risk factors for persistent foot drop after GSL are currently not known. Study Design: This was a retrospective cohort study. Study Participants & Setting: This study included 110 children with CP who underwent GSL for equinus deformity, between 2004 and 2020, at the Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne. Materials/Methods: Outcome measures included standardised physical examination measures and ankle kinematics from three-­dimensional gait analysis. Pre-­and post-­operative measures were compared using Wilcoxon signed-­rank tests and paired sample t-­tests. Results: The cohort included 36 children with hemiplegia and 74 with diplegia. The mean age at GSL surgery was 9.1years (range 4.6-­13.5years). Maximum ankle dorsiflexion in swing phase improved by 12.4° in children with hemiplegia (p<0.001) and 16.3° in children with diplegia (p<0.001). Persistent foot drop after surgery was observed in 42% of children with hemiplegia (15/36 operated limbs) and 19% of children with diplegia (22/115 operated limbs). For children with diplegia, dorsiflexion strength (p<0.001) and selective motor control (p<0.001) improved after surgery. For children with hemiplegia, dorsiflexion strength (p=0.79) and selective motor control (p=0.07) did not improve. Conclusions/Significance: This study found that ankle dorsiflexion during swing phase improved after GSL for equinus deformity, in children with hemiplegia and diplegia. However, those with hemiplegia had a higher frequency of post-­operative foot drop and no clinical improvement in ankle dorsiflexor function, according to physical examination measures.

ABSTRACTS
J10 | Double Calcaneal Osteotomy in Treatment of Severe Planovalgus Foot Deformity in Ambulatory Cerebral Palsy. a Case Series Study
A ALY1, S ABDELGHAFFAR2 1Ain Shams University, Cairo, Al Qahirah, Egypt; 2Ain Shams University, Cairo, Al Qahirah, Egypt
Background and Objective(s): Foot deformities are common in children with cerebral palsy (CP). A planovalgus foot deformity is most likely a consequence of muscle imbalance and abnormal forces on a skeletally immature foot. Pain with weight bearing, ulcerative lesions because of prominent talar head, and gait disturbances resulting from irreducible talo-­ navicular joint sublaxation are frequently occurred. Our hypothesis was to add medial slide calcaneal osteotomy to the lateral column lengthening, double calcaneal osteotomy (DCO), in order to correct more severe flexible planovalgus feet deformities and to decrease the risk of recurrence. Study Design: A prospective non-­randomized case series study. Study Participants & Setting: In the period between January 2013 and December 2017, 16 patients with 24 symptomatic planovalgus feet in Spastic diplegic CP (or mixed with predominant spasticity) were treated by double calcaneal osteotomies. All of our patients were operated in Ain-­ Shams University Hospitals (A Tertiary University Hospital in Egypt). Materials/Methods: 16 patients with 24 symptomatic planovalgus feet in Spastic diplegic CP (or mixed with predominant spasticity) were treated by double calcaneal osteotomies. Nine patients in this study were males and seven were females. The mean age of the patients at the time of surgery was 10.74years (range: 6-­16years). The mean follow­up period was 33.5 months (range: 24-­48 months). Equal number of procedures were performed on the right foot and on the left (12 procedures for each). All patients were ambulatory (GMFCS I: one case =6.25%, GMFCS II: three cases =18.75%, and GMFCS III: 12 cases =75%). Patients involved in this study had clear indications for surgery like pain and callosities from prominent talar head, lever arm dysfunction and shoe or brace unfitness. Results: There was a statistically significant improvement of the clinical heel valgus from preoperative mean of 34.45 (range: 20.75 -­47.38) to postoperative mean of 16.03 (range: 11.25 -­20). Radiologically, there were a statistically significant improvement of all parameters. the percentage of talar head uncoverage reduced from preoperative mean of 31.64 % (range:16.6% -­66.6 %) to postoperative mean of 8.32 % (range: 0% -­33.3 %), Calcaneal pitch angle mean improved from -­1.08 (range: -­5 to 5) to 28.58 (range: 24 -­33), and Lateral TMT1 Improved from 33.91 (range: 17.67 -­47.14) to 17.73 postoperatively (range: 14.25 -­20). Conclusions/Significance: There is a significant improvement in the clinical and radiological parameters in spastic CP patients with flexible planovalgus feet underwent double calcaneal osteotomy on the intermediate term follow up.

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ABSTRACTS
Free Paper Session K: Lifespan Issues/ Nutrition
K1 | Weight Status, Parental Concern About Weight, and the Relationship to Physical Activity and Sport Among Children with Cerebral Palsy
S CREVELING1, M KEKO2, C CRIBB3, C MODLESKY4, H ROCHANI5, G COLQUITT6 1Center for Rehabilitation and Independent Living, Georgia Southern University, Statesboro, GA, USA; 2Jiann Ping-­Hsu College of Public Health, Statesboro, GA, USA; 3Georgia Southern University, Statesboro, GA, USA; 4University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA; 5Georgia Southern University, Statesboro, GA, USA; 6Georgia Southern University, Center for Rehabilitation and Independent Living, Statesboro, GA, USA
Background and Objective(s): Children with cerebral palsy (CP) are more likely to be sedentary and may be at an increased risk for being overweight or obese. Therefore, participation in physical activity (PA) and sport are important for children with CP. The purpose of this study was to examine data from a nationally representative sample to explore associations among weight status (BMI), parental concern about body weight, participation in daily PA, and sport. Study Design: Cross-­sectional. Study Participants & Setting: Participants included parent respondents to the National Survey of Children's Health (NSCH) in the combined years of 2016 to 2020. Among 174,551 respondents, we identified 339 children with CP and 30,463 typically developing children TDC between the ages of 10 to 17. Materials/Methods: The 2016 to 2020 NSCH was conducted by the US Census Bureau online and by mail. Participants were selected with a validated, household pre-­survey screener and were asked to answer a child-­level questionnaire for a randomly selected child in their household. Outcome variables for this study included BMI, parental concern about child's weight status, participation in daily PA, and sport. Age, income, sex, and race were included as covariates. Multiple imputations were performed to address missing data. Logistic regression and chi square analyses were then employed. Results: Only 56.7% of children with CP reported a normal weight compared to 64.4% of TDC (p<0.0001). A higher percentage of parents of children with CP were concerned about their child's weight compared to parents of TDC (24.0% vs. 14.8%; p<0.0001). Both children with CP and TDC had low levels of daily PA (14.2% vs. 17.2%; p=0.1430). Fewer children with CP participated in sport compared to TDC (33.4% vs. 65.9%, respectively, p<0.0001). BMI and parental concern were highly correlated (p<0.0001); therefore, parental concern was only included in the regression model. Parents of children with CP were 1.73 times more likely to be

 |67
concerned about their child's weight (p<0.0001) when controlling for covariates. Children with CP were 72% less likely (p<0.0001) to participate in sports. In TDC whose parents were concerned about their weight, the odds of participating in sport and daily PA were 47% and 67% lower, respectively (both p<0.0001). In children with CP whose parents were concerned about their weight, the odds of participating in sport and daily PA were 40% (p=0.087) and 43% (p=0.169) lower, although not statistically significant. Similarly, BMI was not associated with daily PA or sport among children with CP. Conclusions/Significance: Our findings suggest that parental concern was associated with lower odds of sports participation and PA and that parents of children with CP were more likely to be concerned about their child's weight. Therefore, it is important to explore more on these findings and incorporate them in the development of interventions regarding sport participation and PA.
K2 | Describing Healthcare Concerns of Adolescents and Adults with Cerebral Palsy
C WINGER1, C CASSIDY2, L BRUNTON3, J STAROWICZ4 1Western University, London, ON, Canada; 2St Joseph's Health Care London, Western University, London, ON, Canada; 3School of Physical Therapy-Western University, CanChild Centre for Disability Research, London, ON, Canada; 4Western University, London, ON, Canada
Background and Objective(s): Cerebral palsy (CP) has a heterogenous distribution of severity of disability and associated comorbidities. Despite this heterogeneity, adolescents and adults with CP may share specific healthcare needs. The purpose of this research is to identify healthcare concerns of adolescents and adults with CP in the Transitional and Lifelong Care (TLC) Program, and determine whether there are consistently related co- factors, such as age, sex and functional ability, associated with the number of healthcare concerns. Study Design: This study used a retrospective medical chart review of initial TLC consultation encounters between October 2014, the program's inception, and December 2017. Study Participants & Setting: The sample population is composed of adolescents and adults with CP, aged 14 years or older (mean age = 27.4, SD = 13.2), who received clinical services in an ongoing, coordinated care program (TLC) over a three- year period ( n =241). Materials/Methods: A retrospective chart review of initial TLC consultation encounters between October 2014 and December 2017 was completed using REDCap, and collected data relevant to characteristics, and health and social concerns of people with CP. Demographic information including age, sex, functional ability level according to the Gross Motor Function Classification System, topographical distribution involvement, and number and type of concerns were extracted. Spearman rho correlations were used to identify

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

68 |
associations between demographic factors and total number of concerns. Linear regression was used to determine predictors of the total number of concerns. Descriptive statistics were used to summarize number and types of concerns commonly reported. Results: A total of 2237 distinct concerns were raised by 241 people in the program, and the mean number of concerns ABSTRACTS | 129 per person was 9.3 (SD = 4.3). The minimum number of concerns reported was 1 and maximum was 34 concerns. Concerns that were reported by more than 25% of the sample included care coordination, medication, neurological, assistive devices, social, investigations needed, functional mobility, pain, orthopedic, and neurogenic bowel and bladder. Age was significantly correlated ( r =0.25, p <0.001) and predicted 5% ( p <0.001) of the variance in total number of concerns. Conclusions/Significance: The participants in this study reported a high number of concerns of varied nature that were not easily predicted by condition- specific or demographic variables. This study may better healthcare delivery for adolescents and adults with CP through raising awareness of the health needs of this population, and potentially leading to the creation of intervention and monitoring guidelines. Furthermore, this research has strong potential to influence priority setting in the development of adult- based clinical programs and contribute to best practices for effective transitional care.
K3 | A Systematic Review of the Benefits and Complications of the Blended Diet for Enteral Tube Feeding in Young People
S MCCORMACK1, K PATEL2, T WELLAND3, C SMITH4 1CHI at Tallaght and National University of Ireland Galway, Dublin, Ireland; 2Brighton and Sussex Medical School and Royal Alexandra Children's Hospital Brighton and Sussex University Hospitals NHS Trust, Brighton, UK; 3Brighton and Sussex Medical School, Brighton, UK; 4Royal Alexandra Children's Hospital, Brighton and Sussex University Hospitals NHS Trust, Brighton, UK
Background and Objective(s): Interest and use of blended diets (BD) for young people with neurodisability who are tube-­fed has significantly increased in the last decade, driven primarily by the desires and perceptions of highly motivated caregivers. With wider use in practice, new and increasing literature has emerged on clinical outcomes that may support this practice for health professionals. Objective: To identify, appraise and synthesize the best available evidence on the benefits and complications of the BD versus commercial feeds for enteral tube feeding in young people. Study Design: Systematic review. Study Participants & Setting: Systematic review of studies involving children who receive nutrition using the blended diet via enteral feeding tubes.

ABSTRACTS
Materials/Methods: A systematic review was carried out from December 2020 to June 2021 in line with PRISMA-­P guidance and registered with PROSPERO (CRD42021229453). Searches were conducted of PubMed, Embase, CINAHL, Scopus and Cochrane in accordance with a PICO approach without limitation on year of publication. The search strategy included blended diet OR blenderized diet OR blended OR blenderized OR Pureed OR real food OR liquidized OR liquidised AND enteral OR tube OR gastrostomy OR PEG OR G-­tube OR nasogastric OR NG. Inclusion criteria for the review were (1) English language, (2) studies including children, (3) original research from interventional and observational studies and (4) examination of outcomes. Exclusion criteria were (1) unoriginal research or case reports, (2) studies that focus on management of feeding, preparations or attitudes and (3) studies that compare commercial blends only. Data was synthesised using a formal narrative synthesis approach in keeping with the four-­element framework by Popay et al, using the Mixed Methods Appraisal Tool (MMAT) and A MeaSurement Tool to Assess systematic Reviews (AMSTAR 2) in appraisal. Results: 629 database results were identified. Following screening, 53 were sought for retrieval. Full text article review revealed 6 eligible for inclusion involving 226 participants (age range 9 months -­26years). Study type varied and included cohort, prospective interventional and retrospective. 5 studies reported differences in GI symptoms (n=181). 3 studies reported changes in medication use (n=78). 5 studies reported on growth outcomes (n=148). 3 studies specifically reported complications or adverse events (n=9). The studies varied to an extent that deems them collectively unsuitable for meta-­analysis or other pooled quantitative statistical analysis. However, the available literature indicates towards positive outcomes, particularly in the area of gastrointestinal symptom control with few reports of mild adverse events in the included studies. Conclusions/Significance: There is a paucity of data in this area and much heterogeneity in included studies. This is an important and highly clinically relevant topic and more primary research, ideally using core outcome sets to standardise reporting, is required to answer the key questions.
K4 | Dietary Intake of Children and Adolescents with Cerebral Palsy According to Motor Impairment and the Presence of Dysphagia
M RUIZ BRUNNER1, M CIERI2, A CONDINANZI3, L ESCOBAR ZULUAGA2, E CUESTAS2 1Instituto de Investigación en Ciencias de la Salud (INICSA), Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, Cordoba, Argentina; 2Instituto de Investigación en Ciencias de la Salud (INICSA), Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, Cordoba, Argentina; 3Instituto de Investigación en Ciencias de la Salud (INICSA), Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Consejo Nacional de

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ABSTRACTS
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, Cordoba, Argentina
Background and Objective(s): Cerebral palsy (CP) may be associated with insufficient energy, nutrient intake and gastrointestinal symptoms such as dysphagia. Children with CP have feeding problems due, in part, to poor swallowing functions. To analyze the association between energy and macronutrient intake, presence of dysphagia and motor compromise in children and adolescents aged 2 to 19years with CP attending rehabilitation centers in the Province of Cordoba, Argentina. Study Design: Cross-­sectional study. Study Participants & Setting: Data from 105 children and adolescents of both sexes aged 2 to 19years with CP (67 boys [63.8% 53.84-­72.95]) were collected. Consecutive sampling was performed to include as many cases as possible. Children from 8 public and private rehabilitation institutions with confirm diagnosis of CP were included. Children who presented the following comorbidities were excluded: endocrine or metabolic disorders, genetic diseases and other congenital anomalies and/or treatments that affected or could have affected their growth or nutritional status. Materials/Methods: Motor compromise was assessed with GMFCS. 24h records were collected and analyzed. The results were compared with the recommended by FAO/UNU/ WHO for age and sex. Normal data were presented with mean and SD, while those of non-­normal distribution were described as medians with their ranges. The relationship between variables was analyzed using Fisher, t, or Mann-­ Whitney tests, with a p value <0.05. Results: The mean age was 11years 6 months (SD 4years 4 months). Fifteen (14.3% [8.23-­22.48]) children failed to meet at least 80% of the recommended energy. Those who did not reach 80% of the recommended energy intake had lower intakes of protein than their peers who did (47.37g vs. 71.56g, p=0.0057). There was a lower intake of carbohydrates (p=0.0004) and no statistical differences in the consumption of fat. Children with GMFCS IV to V consume fewer daily calories and carbohydrate calories than their peers with GMFCS I to III. The median protein intake of children GMFCS IV to V group was significantly lower than that of their peers (47.37g vs. 71.56g, p=0.0057). Children with CP who had dysphagia (n=14, 13.34% [7.49-­29.37]) had a significantly lower intake of total calories (p=0.044). Those children with dysphagia consumed fewer grams of carbohydrates (p=0.025) and fat (p=0.008) daily, and there were no significant differences in protein intake. Conclusions/Significance: Energy intakes is lower in children with GMFCS level IV and V and dysphagia. There are differences in the macronutrient's distribution between children that are not able to cover their 80% energy recommendation, with grater motor compromise and those with dysphagia, more studies are needed to analyze these differences.

 |69
K5 | Examining the Development and Utilization of Infection Control Policies to Safely Support Adults with Neurodevelopmental Disabilities in Congregate Living Settings During COVID-­19
B DI REZZE1, M FREEMAN2, A CRAWFORD3, M RIANTO4, E FITZGERALD5 1McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada; 2School of Rehabilitation Science McMaster University, Toronto, ON, Canada; 3McMaster University, Ancaster, ON, Canada; 4McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada; 5School of Health Administration, Dalhousie University, Three Fathom Harbour, NS, Canada
Background and Objective(s): Congregate living settings supporting individuals with neurodevelopmental disabilities (NDD) have experienced unprecedented challenges during the COVID-­19 pandemic. Infection control policies in these living settings can impact on health and well-­being and occupational engagement of individuals with NDD. This study aimed to explore the development and utilization of infection control policies in congregate living settings supporting individuals living with NDD during the COVID-­19 pandemic. Study Design: Qualitative research. Study Participants & Setting: This qualitative study interviewed senior administrative personnel from agencies assisting adults living with NDD residing in Developmental Services community-­based congregate living settings in Ontario, Canada. Materials/Methods: A qualitative approach using Interpretive Description guided this study. Data were gathered from participants using a one-­hour interview conducted online. Thematic analysis was used to analyze the data. Results: Semi-s­tructured interviews were conducted with 30 individuals from 22 agencies. Participating agencies were diverse in size and geographic location. Three categories emerged through thematic analysis -­Development of Infection Control Policies, Implementation of Infection Control Policies, and Impact of Infection Control Policies. Each category yielded subsequent themes. The two themes from the Development of Infection Control Policies category included New Responsibilities and Interpreting the Grey Areas, and Feeling Disconnected and Forgotten. Four themes within Implementation of Infection Control Policies included,"It's Their Home" (i.e., balancing public health guidance and organizational values), Finding Equipment and Resources, Information Overload (i.e., challenges with policy implementation), and Emerging Vaccination (i.e., navigating vaccination for clients and staff). The category of Impact of Infection Control Policies had one theme -­Fatigue and Burnout, capturing the impact of policies on stakeholders in congregate living settings. Conclusions/Significance: Agencies experienced difficulties developing and implementing infection control policies, adversely impacting their clients, families of clients and staff. Public health guidance should be tailored to

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

70 |
congregate settings supporting those living with NDD instead of a universal approach for all congregate settings, because many individuals living with childhood disabilities will require support from living settings of the congregate nature. Providing public health with an understanding of developmental disabilities and the supports required by individuals living in these settings can aid in the implementation of supports that better align with the human rights of individuals living with disabilities into adulthood. To address this knowledge gap, rehabilitation professionals can use a life course focus to increase knowledge and provide insights within public health institutions to enhance community capacity to support those living with NDD.
K6 | Providing Anticipatory Guidance for Children with Gastrostomy Tubes: Feasibility and Impact of an Online Curriculum for Residents
E GOODWIN1, R RISS2, E WEBER3, E RHYNE4, E HUANG5, J COLVIN6 1Children's Mercy Kansas City, Kansas City, MO, USA; 2Children's Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, MO, USA; 3Children's Mercy Hospital & Clinics, Kansas City, MO, USA; 4Children's Mercy, Lee's Summit, MO, USA; 5Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA; 5Children's Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, MO, USA
Background and Objective(s): Adults with Cerebral Palsy (CP) experience ongoing health issues from childhood in addition to the issues related to ageing. A recent systematic review highlighted adults used a wide range of medical and rehabilitation services but also experienced challenges in accessing appropriate health services in adulthood. A quantitative study from Ireland on health service use reported that adults with CP used a range of health services, but required more services to adequately meet their needs. In order to inform planning and delivery of health and care services for adults with CP in Ireland it is necessary to understand their lived experience of adult healthcare. Therefore, this study aimed to explore the experiences of health service use among adults with CP from the perspectives of adults with CP, their support person, and service providers, in Ireland. Study Design: A qualitative study design was employed to gather data on experiences of health service use. Study Participants & Setting: Twenty-­one adults with CP (mean age 38.4years, age range 22-­58years, GMFCS I-­V); seven support people (primary carer[s], family carer[s], spouse or partners, other relative or friend of the adults with CP); and fifteen service providers participated in the study. Participants were recruited from different geographic regions, with the support of the study Public and Patient Involvement advisory group.

ABSTRACTS
Materials/Methods: In-­depth semi-­structured interviews were carried out remotely from March 2021 to August 2021. Thematic analysis was used to analyze the data. Results: Seven themes were identified from the data. (1) Access challenges in adult services: "I cannot go to my GP at all because there is problems with the doors"; (2) insufficient care provision to meet adults' needs: "I don't actually have any service at the minute"; (3) knowledge and information needs in adult services: "Professionals tell you that CP is non-­progressive. They don't really understand how CP worsens ... it's kind of frustrating. You know"; (4) communication and interaction in adult services: "I feel like now they just don't listen as not as enough compared to like when I was in my teens or when I was like in my childhood"; (5) health system challenges in adult services: "I feel like funding experience is a huge issue even before Covid"; (6) taking control of own needs: "I go by myself, mostly I can speak up for myself"; and (7) support people's role and care burden: "Because it can be such a lonely and upsetting and hard journey". Conclusions/Significance: Adults with CP in Ireland face multiple challenges accessing the health services they need. Services were reported to be both insufficient and inadequate, with poor communication and lack of knowledgeable staff, resulting in an increased care burden for support people, and adults with CP self-­advocating for healthcare. Participants highlighted that system-­level interventions in relation to funding and resources are required.
K7 | Post-­fracture Pneumonia Risk and Its Consequential Effects on Health and Survival Is Not Just a Geriatric Problem for Adults with Cerebral Palsy
D WHITNEY1, M BERRI2, T XU2 1University of Michigan, Whitmore Lake, MI, USA; 2University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
Background and Objective(s): Post-­fracture risk of pneumonia, especially within 30-­days of fracture, is often studied in the general geriatric population and is regarded as a high clinical priority. However, for adults with cerebral palsy (CP), fragility fractures may be a unique and prominent risk factor for pneumonia across the adult lifespan, which is a leading cause of death for this population; yet the timing of and complications from post-­fracture pneumonia are unknown. The first objective was to describe patterns and risk of developing pneumonia within 30-­days post-­fracture across the adult lifespan for individuals with CP that sustained an incident fragility fracture as compared to relevant comparison cohorts. We hypothesized that pneumonia risk within 30-­days post-­fracture would be elevated across the adult lifespan and not just in the elderly years. The second objective was to test whether pneumonia increases the risk of adverse outcomes within 30-­days and from 31 to 365days post-­fracture for adults with CP. We hypothesized that developing pneumonia within 30days post-­fracture would have a

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ABSTRACTS

 |71

short-­term (within 30days) and sustained (31-­365days) adverse effect on mortality and cardiovascular events. Study Design: Retrospective cohort study. Study Participants & Setting: This study used nationwide claims data from 01/01/2012 to 12/31/2017 from a random 20% sample of the Medicare fee-­for-­service and Optum Clinformatics® Data Mart. Cohorts included adults 18years of age with CP with an incident fragility fracture (CP+Fx; n=3,688) and comparison cohorts: CP without fractures (CPw/oFx) (1) prior to matching (n=29,429) and (2) after matching to CP+Fx on a number of demographic and medical complexity indicators (n=3,688), and (3) without CP with an incident fragility fracture (w/oCP+Fx; n=363,995). Materials/Methods: Incidence rate (IR) and IR ratios of pneumonia 30-­days post-­fracture were estimated by age group: 18 to 40, 41 to 64, and 65years. For CP+Fx, Cox regression examined the association between time-­varying pneumonia (within 30-­days post-­fracture) with mortality and incidence of cardiovascular events 0 to 30days and 31 to 365days post-­fracture to capture short-­term and sustained effects, respectively. Results: The IR of 30-­day pneumonia for CP+Fx was similar across age groups (IR per 100 person-­months, 8.4-­11.0) and 1.77 to 16.18-­fold higher (all p<0.05) than all comparison cohorts. Peri/post-­fracture pneumonia was associated with an increased rate of mortality (30-­day adjusted HR [aHR]=5.89, 95%CI=3.54-­9.81; 31-­365days aHR=2.89, 95%CI=2.13-­3.92), congestive heart failure 0 to 30days (aHR=3.64, 95%CI=2.01-­6.57) and 31 to 365days (time-­ dependent), myocardial infarction 31 to 365days (aHR=2.03, 95%CI=1.11-­3.71), and cerebrovascular disease 0 to 30days (time-­dependent), without evidence of effect modification by age, sex, or fracture site. Conclusions/Significance: Adults with CP are particularly vulnerable to developing pneumonia within 30-­days post-­ fracture and suffering from its consequences across the adult lifespan and not just in the elderly years.
K8 | Progression of Hip Displacement After Triradiate Cartilage Closure in Non-­ambulatory Cerebral Palsy (CP): Who Needs Continued Radiographic Surveillance?
A ASMA1, A CAN ULUSALOGLU2, M SHRADER3, K ROGERS4, F MILLER5, J HOWARD6 1Nemours Children's Health Delaware Valley, Wilmington, DE, USA; 2Nemours Children Health, Wilmington, DE, USA; 3Nemours A.I. Dupont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, DE, USA; 4Nemours Children's Hospital -­Delaware, Wilmington, DE, USA; 5Nemours Children's Hospital, Wilmington, DE, USA; 6Nemours Children's Health Delaware Valley, Wilmington, DE, USA
Background and Objective(s): Hip surveillance in CP is an accepted practice with consensus-­based guidelines adopted worldwide. For the skeletally immature, with open triradiate

cartilage (TRC), recommendations for radiographic surveillance stemmed from population-­based studies. Little is known, however, about the fate of the CP hip at or after TRC closure. Continued hip surveillance after skeletal maturity has been recommended for those with migration percentage (MP) >33%, increased pelvic obliquity, and scoliosis; based mainly on expert opinion rather than strong evidence. The objective of this study was to determine the prevalence and risk factors associated with progressive CP hip displacement after triradiate cartilage closure, a proxy for skeletal maturity. Study Design: Retrospective cohort study. Study Participants & Setting: Patients with spastic non-­ ambulatory CP (GMFCS IV-­V), hypertonic (spastic, dystonic or mixed type) motor type, regular hip surveillance (at least 3 hip x-­rays after age 10years, 1 x-­ray just prior to TRC closure, at least one x-­ray after age 16years), and at least 2-­ years follow-­up post TRC closure, were included. Materials/Methods: Primary outcome variable was MP. Secondary outcomes included age at TRC closure, previous preventative (adductor releases) or reconstructive (femoral +/-­pelvic osteotomies) surgery, previous intrathecal baclofen (ITB) pump, previous scoliosis surgery, epilepsy, gastrostomy-­tracheostomy use, and associated comorbidities. An "unsuccessful hip" was defined by MP progression to 40%, and/or requiring reconstructive surgery, after TRC closure. Statistical analyses included multivariate regression and Kaplan Meier survivorship. ROC analysis was used to determine MP threshold for progression to an "unsuccessful hip" after TRC closure. Results: 163 patients met the inclusion criteria, with a mean 4.8(±2.1) years follow-­up after TRC closure at age 14.0(±1.8) years. 22.1% of hips (36/163) progressed to an "unsuccessful hip". In multivariate analysis, male gender (p<0.2), first MP after TRC closure (p<0.001), and pelvic obliquity at TRC closure (p=0.003) were significant risk factors for an unsuccessful hip. The mean survival time for progression to an "unsuccessful hip" was higher for females (p<0.02), higher for prior reconstructive vs no surgery (p=0.002). In a subgroup analysis, the survivorship of reconstructive surgery performed after age 6years was significantly higher than age 6years (p<0.05). A first MP after TRC closure of 35% was associated with progression to an "unsuccessful hip" (ROC curve analysis, p<0.001). Conclusions/Significance: The risk factors for progression of CP hip displacement after TRC closure include male gender, no prior hip surgery, a higher MP, and increased pelvic obliquity. Patients with these risk factors and an MP 35% at TRC closure should have continued radiographic surveillance to detect late hip displacement.
K9 | Reduced Wrist Flexor H-­reflex Excitability Is Linked with Increased Wrist Proprioceptive Error in Adults with Cerebral Palsy
S DUKKIPATI1, S WALKER2, M TREVARROW3, S BAKER4, M KURZ5

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

72 |
1University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA; 2Boys Town Institute for Human Neuroscience, Boys Town, NE, USA; 3Boys Town National Research Hospital, Omaha, NE, USA; 4Institute for Human Neuroscience, Boys Town National Research Hospital, Omaha, NE, USA; 5Institute for Human Neuroscience, Boys Town National Research Hospital, Boys Town, NE, USA

ABSTRACTS
was linked with the extent of the proprioceptive deficits. This suggests that the processing of the sensory information at the spinal cord level might play a role in the hand sensorimotor impairment observed in adults with CP. Such deficits likely have a downstream effect on the altered sensorimotor cortical processing overwhelmingly reported in the neuroimaging literature.

Background and Objective(s): Our recent neuroimaging studies have demonstrated anatomical changes in the cervical spinal cord grey matter of adults with cerebral palsy (CP). However, the impact of these changes on the processing of sensory information by the spinal cord neural generators is not well established. The flexor carpi radialis (FCR) H-­reflex is a probe of the proprioceptive sensory pathway that activates cervical motoneurons enabling neuromuscular control of the wrist. To date, it is currently unknown if disruptions in this pathway plays a role in the sensory deficits seen in persons with CP. The objective of this study was to quantify the potential differences in the H-­reflex excitability of wrist flexor motoneurons in adults with CP and to determine the potential link with the extent of the wrist proprioceptive deficits in this population. Study Design: Cohort. Study Participants & Setting: A cohort of adults with CP (n=17, age range=19-­60, mean = 31.98+-­11.68, MACS I-­ IV, 8M/9F) and neurotypical (NT) controls (n=19, age range=19-­62, mean = 30.81+-­9.99, 8M/11F) participated in this study at an academic medical center. Materials/Methods: Each participant underwent testing of the FCR H-­reflex by stimulation of the median nerve and electromyography recordings of the ipsilateral muscle. The FCR recruitment curves were generated for H-­reflex (H) and motor (M) waves at rest. Each participant also completed the wrist position sense test (WPST) where the participant reported their perception of the amount of wrist flexion/ extension induced by the examiner across various range of motions while vision of the hand position was occluded. The ratio of the H-­max response to the maximal M-­wave response (H:M ratio) and the amount of mean absolute error from the position sense test were the main experimental outcome variables. Results: The adults with CP had a lower H:M ratio compared with the NT controls (CP=0.315+/-­0.205, NT=0.436+/-­ 0.181, p=0.035). They also had a higher wrist position sense error compared with the NT controls (CP=12.59+/-­1.33, NT= 8.01+/-­0.52, p<0.001). Interestingly, the adults with CP that had a lower H:M ratio tended to perform more poorly on the WPST (r=-­0.541, p=0.033). Conclusions/Significance: There was an overall reduction in the H-­reflex excitability of spinal motoneurons innervating wrist flexor muscles in adults with CP, and this reduction

K10 | The Role and Use of Assistive Technology in Adults with Cerebral Palsy: A Scoping Review
K DIMITROPOULOU1, R MENDONCA1, H CONGDON2, C BARGER2, S ZHANG2, K DONNELLAN2, M JOHNSON3 1Columbia University, New York, NY, USA; 2Columbia University, New York, NY, USA; 3University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
Background and Objective(s): The transition to adulthood is challenging for individuals with Cerebral Palsy (CP), including the deterioration of health and wellness, loss of supports and reduced access to assistive technologies (AT). While physical, cognitive, and communication challenges may increase, we know very little about the needs for and availability of AT for function and participation. The purpose of this scoping review is to examine the needs, use, and effectiveness of AT in adults with CP. Study Design: We followed the PRISMA-­Scr (2019) guidelines for this review. Study Participants & Setting: We searched 5 databases (MEDLINE, PubMed, PsycInfo, Embase, & CINAHL), for peer-­reviewed prospective/retrospective studies (2005-­2021) of adults (>18years) with CP, and AT. Materials/Methods: Four independent reviewers screened articles by title/abstract, followed by a full-­text screening/ selection, using the Covidence Software. Conflicts were recorded/resolved among all reviewers. Data extraction included study objective, geographical region, design, setting, participant information, type of AT/intervention, and results. Study quality was assessed using the Downs and Black (1998) criteria. Results: The search revealed 4981 studies. After removal of the duplicates, titles and abstracts of 2418 studies were screened and 99 studies were included for full-­text review. Of these, 40 studies were eligible for extraction. Overall, the quality of the studies was "fair". Participants were 18 to 80years with variable functionality. Most studies did not report functionality, race/ethnicity, or SES. We thematically categorized the types of AT: seating, positioning, and mobility equipment (4); adaptive input devices (13), robotic devices (5), and communication and speech technology systems (10). Studies examined prognosis (1), usability of AT (9), training (8), and testing AT (22). Performance (speed/accuracy) was a major outcome (18), followed by physiological gains (7). Only a few studies examined patient reported ease of use and satisfaction. Overall, studies focused on control

ABSTRACTS
devices for interfacing with computers and mobility devices. Users highlighted that perceived comfort, social acceptability and approachability are key components for the utility of the equipment. In the case of seating/positioning/mobility equipment, the use of exoskeletons appears to be beneficial for decreasing the metabolic cost of ambulation. Systematic user training appears to be very effective. Additionally, customization of adaptation for control of mobility devices improves independence in mobility. Conclusions/Significance: There is limited data available for the use of AT technology for adults with CP. The studies had significant design and bias limitations. The need for control devices for accessing computers and mobility equipment is a primary need followed by devices related to improving physiological and participatory aspects of ambulatory ability. Training is important with individualized coaching strategies being the most effective. Many studies lack user perspective.
Free Paper Session L: Epidemiology/ Health Services
L1 | Supporting Ultra-­poor Children with Cerebral Palsy and Their Families with Integrated Microfinance/ livelihood and Community-­based Rehabilitation Program -­A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial
M AL IMAM1, I JAHAN2, M DAS2, A KHAN3, M MUHIT4, R POWER5, D AKBAR6, N BADAWI7, G KHANDAKER8,9,10,11 1Central Queensland University, Rockhampton, Queensland, Australia; 2Central Queensland University, Rockhampton, Queensland, Australia; 3University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia; 4CSF Global, Dhaka, Bangladesh; 5Western Sydney University, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia; 6Central Queensland University, Rockhampton, Queensland, Australia; 7Grace Centre for Newborn Intensive Care, Cerebral Palsy Alliance, University of Sydney, Westmead, New South Wales, Australia; 8CSF Global, Dhaka, Bangladesh; 9Asian Institute of Disability and Development, University of South Asia, Dhaka, Dhaka District, Bangladesh; 10Discipline of Child and Adolescent Health, Sydney Medical School, The University of Sydney, Westmead, New South Wales, Australia; 11Central Queensland Public Health Unit, Central Queensland Hospital and Health Services, Rockhampton, Queensland, Australia
Background and Objective(s): Poverty is a key contributor to delayed diagnosis and limited access to early intervention and rehabilitation for children with cerebral palsy (CP) in rural Bangladesh. Earlier studies suggested that efforts to improve outcomes for children with disabilities in low-­and middle-­income countries should include combined measures to improve service provision and family economic/ social capital. This trial aimed to test the efficacy of an "integrated microfinance/livelihood and community-­based

 |73
rehabilitation (CBR)" (IMCBR) program in improving health-­related quality of life (HRQoL) and motor function of children with CP from ultra-­poor families and social capital gain to those families from such intervention in rural Bangladesh. Study Design: Cluster randomised controlled trial. Study Participants & Setting: Children with CP aged 5years from ultra-­poor families in rural Bangladesh. Materials/Methods: Children with CP were randomly allocated in three arms; Arm-­A: livelihood support and CBR (IMCBR), Arm-­B: CBR only, and Arm-­C: care-­as-­usual. Livestock (e.g. goat, lamb, chicken, etc.) or sewing machines were provided as livelihood support. As part of CBR, group-­ based goal directed training sessions and parent training sessions were organised weekly and home visits were made fortnightly. The CBR was stopped 2.5 months post-­enrollment due to the COVID-­19 pandemic and was replaced with phone follow-­up. The primary outcome was HRQoL of children while Gross Motor Function Classification System (GMFCS) level of children and social capital of their families were the secondary outcomes. Intention-­to-t­reat analysis was performed. Results: Twenty-­four clusters including 251 children-­ primary caregivers' dyads were assigned to three arms; Arm-­A=80, Arm-­B=82, and Arm-­C=89. Between baseline and endline, the percentage change in mean HRQoL was highest in Arm-­A (30.0%) with significant mean differences between Arm-­A and Arm-­B (p=0.015). The GMFCS level significantly changed both in Arm-­A (p=0.007) and Arm-­C (p=0.011). Also, the improvement in mean total social capital score was significantly higher in Arm-­A compared to Arm-­B (p<0.001) and Arm-­C (p<0.001). Conclusions/Significance: The findings suggest that IMCBR could improve HRQoL and motor functions of children with CP and the social capital of their ultra-­poor families. Long-­term follow-­up of the trial participants and/ or future exploration of such interventions is essential.
L2 | Socio-­demographics and Their Effect on Access to Care in Children with Cerebral Palsy
M REDDY1, H SHOVAL2, J CHENG3 1Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, Watchung, NJ, USA; 2Children's Specialized Hospital, New Brunswick, NJ, USA; 3Rutgers-­New Jersey Medical School, Watchung, NJ, USA
Background and Objective(s): Children with CP have previously noted mobility and communication barriers that prevent them from attending appointments. Additionally, in this patient population, appointment attendance is especially important as it was found that follow-­up is associated with a lower risk of contracture. However, much research in regards to appointment attendance in patients with CP is qualitative; quantitative results may help elucidate predictors of whether a patient can attend appointments. This study aims to provide quantitative analysis in regards to whether socio-­ demographic factors (including age, gender, race, ethnicity,

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

74 |

ABSTRACTS

language, distance from the clinic, primary insurance, active physiatry medications, income, and distance from site of care) and condition severity (measured by GMFCS) differentially impact access to care in children with cerebral palsy (CP). Study Design: This was a retrospective cohort study with a consecutive sample. Study Participants & Setting: Patients under 21 with CP who resided in New Jersey and were seen in-­person for physiatry at Children's Specialized Hospital (CHS) between 1/2019 to 12/2019 were included (n=199). Materials/Methods: Primary outcome measures were the number of physiatry appointments attended, and the ratio of no-­shows to appointments attended. SPSS Statistics 23.0 software (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA) was used for all analyses. Categorical socio-­demographic variables were assessed in relation to appointment attendance using an ANCOVA test (general linear model). GMFCS was analyzed in two groups: scores of 1 to 3 and scores of 4 to 5. ANCOVA covariates included age, distance from site of care, and income. The U.S. Census' recorded median household income for each patient's zip code was used for income. The shortest distance from the patient's address to the site of care, as recommended by Google Maps, was recorded as distance. Results: Children from primarily English-­speaking families (p=0.037), who were younger (p=0.013), and who were Hispanic/Latino (p=0.033) attended more physiatry visits. Not speaking English (p=0.05), not being Hispanic/Latino (p=0.035), and living farther away from the clinic (p=0.014) was associated with a higher rate of no-­shows. Conclusions/Significance: Socio-­demographic factors such as language spoken, age, ethnicity, and distance may be associated with reduced appointment attendance or a higher no-­ show rate in children with CP. This paper adds quantitative data in regards to access to care in pediatric patients with CP, which can be used for allocation of resources for patients who may be likely to have reduced appointment attendance.
L3 | Impact of Socioeconomic Status, Maternal Education, and Gestational Age on Medical, Developmental, and Functional Outcomes Among Children with Cerebral Palsy
T MOULTON1, M MSALL2, S SAFDAR3, D GAEBLER-­SPIRA4 1Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA; 2University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA; 3University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA; 4Shirley Ryan AbilityLab, Chicago, IL, USA
Background and Objective(s): A wide range of health conditions are known to be impacted by the environment that a child is born into and grows up in, and health disparities are well documented in minority race and ethnic groups. Individuals with cerebral palsy (CP) have a brain injury early in development that has an impact on their functioning and participation during childhood and adulthood. The purpose

of this study was to determine of there was a relationship between environmental factors of relative social advantage and the medical and functional outcomes of a cohort of individuals with CP. We hypothesized that more severe medical, developmental, and functional impairments would be associated with less advantageous income status, minority status and ethnicity. Study Design: Retrospective cohort study of prognosis. Study Participants & Setting: We analyzed data from 1,196 de-­identified records of the Cerebral Palsy Research Registry (CPRR), a voluntary, IRB approved, multi-­institutional collaborative database. Materials/Methods: We extracted independent variables of income (from zip code data on the % of the population below the poverty level), ethnicity and race and dichotomized to `advantaged' and `disadvantaged' based on the threshold of 20% of adults below poverty and minority race and ethnicity status. We also extracted 11 dependent variables (gestational age, birthweight, gross motor function, manual ability, behavior, breathing, nutrition intake, hearing, seizures, understanding language, and vision) that were dichotomized into more and less severe impairments based on the responses. Odds ratios were calculated for the impact of each of the independent variables on the dependent variables to determine if less advantaged income, race or ethnicity increased the odds of a more severe outcome. A Pearson's chi square test was used to determine significance. Results: There was a significantly higher chance of gross (GM) and fine motor (FM) impairments for those with disadvantage in income (GM OR=1.58, p<0.01; FM OR=1.50, p=0.02), or marginalized race (GM OR=2.06, p<0.01) or ethnicity (GM OR=1.57, p=0.03; FM OR=1.62, p=0.03). Ethnicity was further implicated, although positively, in gestational age (OR=0.71, p=0.05), while race played a role in breathing impairments (OR=2.51, p=0.02), nutritional intake (OR=1.74, p<0.01), hearing (OR=0.52, p=0.02), understanding language (OR=1.80, p<0.01) and birthweight (OR=1.37, p=0.04). Conclusions/Significance: Across indicators of social disadvantage we found evidence for negative health consequences for people with CP in our cohort. Additional resources are required for equity in access to services for vulnerable populations of individuals with CP. These supports must include timely and comprehensive access, supports for basic needs, and attention to the structural racism. These comprehensive supports are needed in order to promote enablement of functioning and participation for vulnerable individuals with CP and mitigate negative social impacts, provided across generations, from conception through the lifecourse.
L4 | Immigrant Children with Cerebral Palsy, How Different Are They from the Native Population Born in the 21st Century? Data from the SCPE-­affiliated Portuguese Surveillance Programme
A CADETE1, T FOLHA2, D VIRELLA2, J ALVARELHÃO3, E CALADO4

ABSTRACTS
1Programa de Vigilância Nacional Paralisia Cerebral, Centro de Reabilitação Paralisia Cerebarl Calouste Gulbenkian -­Santa Casa da Misericordia de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal; 2Programa de Vigilância Nacional da Paralisia Cerebral, Departamento de Epidemiologia, Instituto Nacional deSaúde Doutor Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal; 3Programa de Vigilancia Nacional de Paralisia Cerebral, Escola Superior de Saúde da Universidade de Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal; 4Programa de Vigilancia Nacional Paralisia Cerebral, Sociedada Portuguesa de Neuropediatria, Lisboa, Portugal
Background and Objective(s): The Portuguese National Surveillance of Cerebral Palsy (PVNPC) registers clinic, epidemiologic and functionality data of children with cerebral palsy (CP) born since 2001, at the recommended age of 5-­year-­old. Children with CP born abroad are monitored, due to the previously identified significant differences from those born in Portugal. We present the update of the comparison of immigrant children with CP born from 2001 to 2012 with their native counterparts, born in Portugal. Study Design: Populational surveillance-­based, prevalence study with nested case-­control study. Study Participants & Setting: Data from birth-­cohorts 2001 to 2012 were retrieved from the PVNPC database. Those children residing in Portugal at 5years-­age between 2006 and 2017 were included. Children were considered as either "native" or "immigrant" depending on the reported residence of the mother at the time of delivery. Materials/Methods: PVNPC shares common methodology, definitions and tools with SCPE; it additionally uses specific classification and description tools, as the 5 levels Complexity of Cerebral Palsy Score (based on the presence of 4 items: GMFCS level III-­V; severe visual and/or hearing impairment; cognition IQ <50; active epilepsy) and the Educational Inclusion Classification (for this analysis, those attending institutions for children with disabilities or kept at home were considered not included in the pre-­school system). Comparisons were made concerning etiology, clinical presentation, functionality, neuroimaging and educational inclusion. Chi-­square test was used and odds ratio with 95% confidence intervals were estimated. Results: Out of 2188 children with CP residing in Portugal, 175 (8%) were not native, 69% from Africa and 13% South America. Immigrant children were more likely to be born at term (71% vs. 53%; OR 2.2 [1.5;3.2]) and to be born at more than 32weeks of gestation (85% vs. 70%; OR 2.4 [1.5;4.0]). Immigrant children were more likely to have identified post-­neonatal causes of CP (19% vs. 8%; OR 2,6 [1.6;4.0]). Spastic CP is the predominant clinical type in both groups. Using SCPE-­MRI Classification, gray matter lesion was more predominant among immigrant children (45% vs. 29%; OR 2.0 [1.3;3.1]). Complexity Score zero applied to a lesser proportion of immigrant children (34% vs. 21%; OR 0.5 [0.3;0.8]). Immigrant children were more likely to be classified as GMFCS III to V (64% vs. 49%; OR 1.9 [1.3;2.6]). The odds of not being included at school were

 |75
higher among immigrant children (38% vs. 15%; OR 3.5 [2.2;5.3]). Conclusions/Significance: Children with CP born abroad, and their immigrant families, live with significantly more complex CP than their native counterparts. Their different background of risk factors reflects on the imagology and the clinical findings. Their functionality and morbidity demand special medical and social care that need to be fulfilled. These conditions, together with social handicaps, contribute to impaired educational inclusion, a beacon of unachieved requirements.
L5 | Barriers to Access Faced by Non-­English-­ speaking Families of Children with Cerebral Palsy
C HERRERO1, D BLOOM2, M KARAMITOPOULOS3, N BLETNITSKY3, E DEL ROSARIO4 1NYU Langone Health, New York, NY, USA; 2NYU, New York, NY, USA; 3NYU Langone Health, New York, NY, USA; 4NYU Langone Orthopedic Hospital, New York, NY, USA
Background and Objective(s): Access to timely, comprehensive medical care can be difficult for patients with cerebral palsy (CP) and other neuromuscular disabilities. Health inequalities are further magnified for patients who are non-­ white and whose families with limited English proficiency (LEP). The aim of this study was to construct a questionnaire for CP patients and their families to help specific identify barriers to care and assess if these barriers are magnified in LEP families. Study Design: This is a qualitative research study with a consecutive sample for subject selection. Study Participants & Setting: We distributed the survey to all patients in our multicultural, urban tertiary care Neuromuscular clinic who spoke one of the five languages in which it was translated from March 2020 to July 2021. Materials/Methods: The anonymous questionnaire assessed access to various aspects of care, including medical, rehabilitation, social work, and transportation services. Our questionnaire was translated into Spanish, Mandarin, Russian, and Bengali -­the most common non-­English languages spoken by families in our Neuromuscular clinic. The survey covered demographics, subjective and objective data about diagnosis and treatment information, access to care, insurance, services available, cultural competency and regarding coordination of care. Results: There was a total of 97 surveys collected: 53 English and 44 LEP in this preliminary data collection. A Fisher exact test was performed on all questions. Answers to multiple-­ choice questions were collapsed to two options (i.e., "not difficult & somewhat difficult" and "very difficult & not possible" were combined). All LEP surveys were combined to have a larger group to compare to the English-­speaking cohort. The family income of the LEP patients was significantly less: <30K (43.4% v 63.6%) and >45K (13.6% v 37.7%). More LEP patients had health care needs that were not met (61.4% v 15.1%). The greatest differences, when listed, were in dental

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

76 |
care (27.3% v 7.5%) and vision (18.2% v 9.4%). The most citied reasons by the LEP group were: not eligible for services (29.5%), problems with transportation (25%) and problems getting appointments (22.7%). LEP parents reported they much less often got help with coordinating care compared to what they needed (73.7% v 39.1%). More LEP parents had to leave their jobs over the last 12 months because of their child's health conditions (56.8% v 32.1%). More LEP patients were diagnosed older than two years old (29.6% v 11.3%). Conclusions/Significance: These preliminary results confirm our concerns that minority groups have delayed diagnoses, more challenges in obtaining consistent care, and feel greater financial hardships when trying to obtain essential care for their children. There is scant current literature about barriers to care in diverse CP populations. We will continue to collect and analyze data from the surveyed population groups and address these problems to improve our care for all patients.
L6 | Ethnicity and Household Impact on GMFCS and PODCI Performance Status
P GATES1, M SIGLAR THOMAS2, J ANDARY3, C WEYERMULLER 1Shriners Children's Shreveport, Shreveport, LA, USA; 2Shriners Children's Shreveport, Shreveport, LA, USA; 3Andary Enterprises, USA
Background and Objective(s): In 2000, we created an IRB approved database for children with Cerebral Palsy (CP) to assess Performance, Functional Levels, impact of general health and contextual factors. Study Design: Prognosis study, cross-­sectional study. Study Participants & Setting: At a regional referral pediatric orthopaedic hospital, family of 2516 unique patients (GMFCS levels I-­V, 2/3 majority ethnicity, 1/3 minority), a convenience sample, answered PODCI questionnaires giving 3496 observations (one-­nine per child). Materials/Methods: Data collected: age, sex, co-­morbidities (CM), ethnicity, household composition, and PODCI scales Upper Extremity (UE), Transfers Basic Mobility (TBM), Sports Physical Function (SPF), Pain Free/Comfort (PFC), Happiness (HAP), and Global (averaging UE, TBM, SPF, PFC). Chi-­square and likelihood ratio Chi-­square analysis compared Caucasian patients with ethnic minorities combined, and for household composition two separate comparisons (father present or not, additional siblings) were done, using One-­way ANOVA. Results: Of 2358 children, there were 465 children GMFCS I, 884 children GMFCS II, 471 children GMFCS III, 330 children GMFCS IV, and 208 children GMFCS V. Children of minority ethnicity were much more likely to be represented in the more severe GMFCS categories (p<0.0001), Caucasians in the milder GMFCS categories. PODCI scale means showed significant differences comparing majority with minority ethnicity in all but PFC and HAP: UE p=0.0286, TBM p<0.0002, SPF p=0.0011, Global p=0.0025. There was a difference in majority vs. minority ethnicity in some circumstances with/

ABSTRACTS
without limiting co-­morbidities (limCM). LimCM appear to decrease discrepancies between ethnic groups: UE, for those with parent-­reported limiting CM, no significant difference (NSD); without limiting CM, minority status less participation p=0.0140. TBM, borderline difference with limiting CM, minority ethnicity less participation p=0.0524; no limiting CM, minority status less participation p=0.0003. SPF, NSD with limiting CM; with no limiting CM, minority status less participation p=0.0061. PFC, NSD with/without limiting CM, between ethnicity groups. HAP, with limiting CM, minority status is happier p=0.0218; no limiting CM, NSD between ethnicity groups. Global, those with limiting CM, NSD; no limiting CM, minority status lower performance, p=0.0006. PODCI scale means for children by household composition showed that children with Father present or more than two siblings present in the household reporting Less Pain/more Comfort (p<0.0002). No other Scale means showed significant differences for Household composition. Conclusions/Significance: In our population, 1/3 minority children have greater involvement with their primary diagnosis of CP. Children of majority ethnicity with additional co-­morbidities are as limited in community performance as those of minority ethnicity. Of particular note is that pain is not reported as worse between ethnic groups, and happiness is greater in minority children.
L7 | Barriers to Implementation of Assessment Protocol by Speech-­language Pathologists: A Systematic Review
A NORRIS1, C SKUBIK-­PEPLASKI2 1University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA; 2Eastern Kentucky University, Richmond, KY, USA
Background and Objective(s): Previous research has identified barriers to the implementation of evidence-­based assessments and variability of implementation can have a significant impact on accuracy and ability to provide equitable care. The purpose of this systematic review was to appraise the literature for the common barriers to the implementation of assessment protocols as reported by speech-­ language pathologists in a variety of settings with a range of patient populations. Study Design: This study was a systematic review of the literature regarding assessment practices of speech-­language pathologists across the field. Study Participants & Setting: A systematic search of electronic databases was completed, and inclusion and exclusion criteria were applied. Only published, peer-­reviewed studies were included if the researchers collected either quantitative or qualitative data on the barriers that SLPs perceived to impact assessment use. Materials/Methods: Articles were critically appraised using the Mixed Methods Appraisal Tool (MMAT) in order to scrutinize the methodological quality of the research. The Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI) GRADE approach was used in

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ABSTRACTS
combination with a Levels of Evidence system in order to assess the rigor of each study. A method of constant comparison was used to define determinant domains. Thematic and content analysis was used to organize the data into these domains. Results: Twenty studies were critically appraised using the MMAT and the average score was 84%; indicating overall high methodological quality. The JBI levels of evidence for effectiveness were "4b" in 17/20 studies, and a level "2" out of 5 levels of meaningfulness in 17/20. The JBI GRADE of recommendation was an "A" for 16/20 studies. Overall, this indicated a strong strength of recommendation. Limitations were that surveys varied by study, which may have hindered comparison. However, systematic analysis based on existing frameworks allowed compilation of available data into the following determinant domains: time, resources, research, organizational, patient, therapist. Qualitative data and themes were combined with frequency ratings of each determinate domain to synthesize a rich description of the common barriers to the implementation of assessments by SLPs. Conclusions/Significance: This study demonstrates that in the field of Speech-­language Pathology there are a common set of barriers that present consistently for clinicians across a variety of settings working with a variety of patient populations. We strongly recommend that researchers should actively collaborate with clinicians to decrease the persistent barriers.
L8 | Cerebral Palsy in the Western Province of Sri Lanka: A Hospital Based Observational Study from a Low Middle Income Setting
T MADUSHIKA1, R FERNANDO2, D WIJESEKARA3, N MUTTIAH4, J JAGODA5, P RATHNAYAKA6, J WANIGASINGHE7, G KITNASAMY8, G KHANDAKER9,10,11,12, H SMITHERS-­SHEEDY13, S SUMANASENA14, T KARIM15 1Department of Disability Studies, Faculty of Medicine, University of Kelaniya, 'Ayati' National Center for Children with Disabilities, Ragama, Western Province, Sri Lanka; 2Department of Disability Studies, Faculty of Medicine, University of Kelaniya, 'Ayati' National Center for Children with Disabilities, Ragama, Western Province, Sri Lanka; 3Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Sri Jayewardenepura, Colombo South Teaching Hospital, Kalubowila, Western Province, Sri Lanka; 4Department of Disability Studies, Faculty of Medicine, University of Kelaniya, 'Ayati' National Center for Children with Disabilities, Ragama, Western Province; 5Lady Ridgeway Children's Hospital, Colombo, Negombo, Western Province, Sri Lanka; 6Lady Ridgeway Children's Hospital, Colombo, Western Province, Sri Lanka; 7Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Colombo, Lady Ridgeway Children's Hospital, Colombo, Western Province, Sri Lanka; 8Cerebral Palsy Lanka Foundation, Colombo, Western Province, Sri Lanka; 9CSF Global, Dhaka, Bangladesh; 10Asian Institute of Disability and Development,

 |77
University of South Asia, Dhaka, Dhaka District, Bangladesh; 11Discipline of Child and Adolescent Health, Sydney Medical School, The University of Sydney, Westmead, New South Wales, Australia; 12Central Queensland Public Health Unit, Central Queensland Hospital and Health Services, Rockhampton, Queensland, Australia; 13Cerebral Palsy Alliance, Discipline of Child and Adolescent Health, Sydney Medical School, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia; 14Department of Disability Studies, Faculty of Medicine, University of Kelaniya, 'Ayati' National Center for Children with Disabilities, Western Province, Ragama, Sri Lanka; 15Specialty of Child and Adolescent Health, Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia
Background and Objective(s): Cerebral palsy (CP) is the commonest motor disorder of childhood worldwide with an estimated prevalence of 2.1 per 1000 live births globally. To date, there has been an absence of reliable data on CP in Sri Lanka. Detailed and reliable information on CP is required in order to identify strategies to prevent and manage CP in Sri Lanka. Thus, the aim of this study was to describe the clinical profile of children included in the newly established Sri Lanka CP Register (SLCPR). Study Design: Prospective cross-­sectional study. Study Participants & Setting: Conducted in the Western Province from September 2018 to October 2021 in three teaching hospitals with child development, rehabilitation and neurology multi-­disciplinary services. Children <18years with a confirmed clinical diagnosis of CP or identified formally as `at risk' of CP were included Materials/Methods: Informed consent was required from caregivers. A minimum data set was collected by physiotherapists based on that used by the Australian Cerebral Palsy Register. Information on sociodemographic, pre/peri/ neonatal, and post neonatal risk factors, and associated impairments were collected. Clinical motor type, topography, and mobility levels were evaluated. SPSS version 22 used to analyse descriptive statistics for demographic data and the chi-s­quare test to compare differences between categorical variables. Results: Data for 755 children were extracted, mean age 61. 6 months (SD 43.8) and 62.5% (n=472) males. The mean age at diagnosis of CP was 6.9 months (SD 10.49 months). There were 423 (56%) children 5 and 2 to 5 year is the single largest age group. The majority of children (95.5%) acquired CP in the pre/peri/ neonatal period. The mean birth weight was 2292.4g (SD 797.8g) with 52.8% (n=386) low birth weight (<2500g). The predominant motor type at diagnosis was spasticity in the majority (60.9%, n=355) followed by dystonia (35.3% n=204). Of children with spastic CP 47.8% (n=170) had tri and quadriplegia and 32.6% (n=116) mono/hemiplegia. 77.6% (n=416/721) required assistive equipment for functional mobility (GMFCS level III-­V). At the age 5+ years, the majority of children (77.7%, n=259/344) had spastic CP. 68.3% (n=212) were described as GMFCS III to V. The majority of children 53.9% (n=389)

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

78 |
with a pre/peri/neonatal cause for CP reported one or more associated impairments. Of them 20.3% had hearing impairment (n=70), 20%, speech impairments (n=124), 34.1% epilepsy (n=109) and visual impairment (CVI) 50.8% (n=175). Conclusions/Significance: The age at diagnosis of this hospital-­based study from Sri Lanka is significantly lower than majority reported studies from other LMICs. Early identification provides important opportunities for timely access to early intervention services in the Western Province. In contrast to many HICs the proportion of children with a dystonic motor type is relatively high and warrants further investigation. The SLCPR is an important resource which will support new research towards investigating opportunities for prevention and service planning for children with CP.
L9 | Improving After Visit Communication in a Pediatric Multidisciplinary Neuromuscular Program
E LIN1, K SHADMAN2, S HESS3, L BUTLER4, S RANADE1, C ELAIHO5, R FIELDS1, B SHAH1 1Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA; 2University of Wisconsin School of Medicine, Madison, WI, USA; 3Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, NY, USA; 4Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA; 5Icahn School of Medicine of Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Background and Objective(s): Multidisciplinary care team visits are an essential part of coordinated care for children with cerebral palsy and neuromuscular disorders. After visit summaries (AVS) from all specialty providers are critical in communication to families for care coordination and shared care planning. Our goal was to improve completion rate and quality of AVS for each subspecialty encounter of a multidisciplinary clinic. Study Design: This is a quality improvement study. Study Participants & Setting: Providers within a multidisciplinary cerebral palsy/neuromuscular clinic were asked to participate in this quality improvement project regarding after visit summary communication. Materials/Methods: Our urban academic tertiary care institution's comprehensive neuromuscular care program meets twice monthly and includes: orthopedics, neurology, pulmonology, nutrition, neurosurgery, endocrinology, urology, rehabilitation medicine, dentistry, and primary care. Each patient sees multiple providers per visit. A multidisciplinary stakeholder team noted large variation in completion and content of AVS in our collaborative visit. Using quality improvement methodology, our stakeholder team defined best practice as completion of AVS by all providers for each patient. The previously validated Family Experiences of Care Coordination (FECC) was chosen as the measure of quality care coordination for this population of children with medical complexity. A key driver diagram was constructed. Plan-­Do-­Study-­Act (PDSA) cycles included (1) creation of a smartphrase for use in the AVS to standardize

ABSTRACTS
information (2) review of critical elements of the AVS with providers at each clinic day. Process measures included AVS completion by all providers at a visit and selected quality indicators of the FECC (including follow-­up plan and provider contact information). Data were tracked via run charts. Results: Median of a 6-­month baseline period of completed AVS (n=29 patients) was 38.5%. After the initial intervention, median increased to 81% (n=40 patients). Inclusion of the follow-­up plan increased from 0 to 50%. Inclusion of contact information for at least one provider also demonstrated improvement by 35% over a 6-­month period. Conclusions/Significance: Implementation of a template summary was associated with improved completion and quality of AVS in a multidisciplinary neuromuscular clinic. Further efforts to understand patient-­centered outcomes regarding our team's communication are ongoing through FECC survey of participating families.
L10 | Myelomeningocele Functional Classification (MMFC): Correlation with Other Myelomeningocele Classifications
A TEDESCO1, R NICOLINI-P­ ANISSON2 1Private Practice, Caxias Do Sul, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil; 2Centro Universitário da Serra Gaúcha FSG, Caxias do Sul, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil
Background and Objective(s): Several classifications have historically been used for myelomeningocele, based mainly on clinical and/or anatomical aspects. None of them, however, contemplate functional issues as the recent published Myelomeningocele Functional Classification (MMFC) which, when applied together with the Functional Mobility Scale (FMS), can allow for a functional definition of a given patient, helping to delineate the gait prognosis and to facilitate the communication among healthcare professionals. The correlation between MMFC and other myelomeningocele classifications has not been explored. The purpose of this study is to verify the statistical correlation between MMFC and the Pediatric Motor Activity Log (PEDI), FMS, anatomical classification and degree of muscular strength of lower extremities. Study Design: A convenience sampling. Study Participants & Setting: 20 patients with myelomeningocele (age 3-­66y) from a secondary care rehabilitation center in southern Brazil. Materials/Methods: Patients were classified by MMFC and anatomical level and evaluated using PEDI, FMS, and muscle strength of lower extremities in order to verify the correlation between classifications. The statistical analysis was done using the software SPSS version 20.0. The established level of significance was 5%. The Spearman's rank correlation test was used. Results: The MMFC showed very strong correlation with FMS 5 meters (r=0.94, p=0.00) and 50 meters (r=0.94, p=0.00) and muscular strength of hip extensors (r=0.95, p=0.00). Strong correlation was found with anatomical

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ABSTRACTS
level (r=0.83, p=0.00), FMS 500 meters (r=0.87, p=0.00), mobility domain in functional skills scale of PEDI (r=0.84, p=0.00) and mobility domain in caregiver assistance scale of PEDI (r=0.77, p=0.00), muscular strength of hip abductors (r=0.87, p=0.00), hip flexors (r=0.75, p=0.00), and knee flexors (r=0.82, p=0.00). Moderate correlation was found between MMFC and strength of knee extensors (r=0.65, p=0.00). Conclusions/Significance: The MMFC introduces aspects of functional mobility and performance which were not accomplished in the classifications previously used for myelomeningocele and is aligned with the idea of classifications based on

 |79
functional aspects used for other neuromuscular conditions, such as GMFCS for cerebral palsy. It shows straight correlations with many aspects of other classifications (FMS, PEDI, anatomical levels and muscular strength of hip flexors, extensors, abductors, knee flexors and extensors) so we conclude that it is a very useful tool to more precisely delineate the functional status of the patient, which can help in the clinical practice by especially determining gait prognosis (and consequently directing treatment goals) and standardizing communication among healthcare professionals. Further studies based on this data can be accomplished to better understand the role of the different variables.

14698749, 2022, S4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.15355 by MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, Wiley Online Library on [16/11/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

