Journal of Communication in Healthcare
Strategies, Media and Engagement in Global Health
ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ycih20
The science of trust: future directions, research gaps, and implications for health and risk communication
Renata Schiavo (Moderator and Roundtable Chair/Organizer), Gil Eyal (Participant), Rafael Obregon (Participant), Sandra C. Quinn (Participant), Helen Riess (Participant) & Nikita Boston-Fisher (Co-Organizer)
To cite this article: Renata Schiavo (Moderator and Roundtable Chair/Organizer), Gil Eyal (Participant), Rafael Obregon (Participant), Sandra C. Quinn (Participant), Helen Riess (Participant) & Nikita Boston-Fisher (Co-Organizer) (2022): The science of trust: future directions, research gaps, and implications for health and risk communication, Journal of Communication in Healthcare, DOI: 10.1080/17538068.2022.2121199 To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/17538068.2022.2121199
Published online: 10 Oct 2022.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 543
View related articles
View Crossmark data
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ycih20

JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATION IN HEALTHCARE https://doi.org/10.1080/17538068.2022.2121199
ROUNDTABLE PROCEEDINGS
The science of trust: future directions, research gaps, and implications for health and risk communication
Renata Schiavo (Moderator and Roundtable Chair/Organizer)a,b,c,d, Gil Eyal (Participant)e, Rafael Obregon (Participant)f, Sandra C. Quinn (Participant)g, Helen Riess (Participant)h,i and Nikita Boston-Fisher (Co-Organizer)j,k
aEditor-in-Chief; bDepartment of Sociomedical Sciences, Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health, New York, NY, USA; cHealth Equity Initiative, New York, NY, USA; dStrategies for Equity and Communication Impact (SECI)SM, New York, NY, USA; eDepartment of Sociology, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA; fUNICEF-Paraguay, Asunción, Paraguay; gDepartment of Family Science and Maryland Center for Health Equity, School of Public Health, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA; hDepartment of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA; iEmpathetics, Inc., Boston, MA, USA; jSenior Editorial Assistant; kMcGill University, Faculty of Management, Montreal, Quebec, Canada

ABSTRACT
`Trust is among the most important factors in human life, as it pervades' all domains of society [1] and related decision-making processes. This includes people's trust in science, and in clinical and public health solutions. Unequivocally, community and patient trust are foundational to
the adoption and maintenance of health-related behaviors, social norms, and policies. Yet,
trust has to be earned and developed over time and through multiple interactions. Trust is about dialogue and human connection. It's about listening and knowing that one interaction will not be enough to build trust. It is also influenced by a variety of social, economic, cultural, and political factors, past experiences, and the history of specific communities and patient groups. It should be at the core of the health and social systems
with which people interact. More recently, trust in evidence-based information has also been affected by misinformation, not only on social media but also in a variety of community, institutional, and patient settings. Ultimately, we are in the midst of a global
trust crisis that precedes the COVID-19 pandemic and is often rooted in the health, racial,
and social inequities many groups experience [2].

KEYWORDS Science of trust; trust; health communication; risk communication; social and behavior change; health equity; healthcare; global health; public health; medicine

As part of this Journal's Science of Trust Initiative [3], this roundtable discussion took place on 14 July 2022, and convened experts from a variety of health, behavioral, and social sciences disciplines to advance research scholarship on the `science of trust', discuss the role of communication in building and restoring trust at the individual, community and population levels, and identify research gaps and promising strategies. Several themes, action steps, and recommendations emerged from this interdisciplinary discussion, and have implications for health and risk communication across research, policy and practice, and multiple professional fields.
Roundtable discussion
Dr. Renata Schiavo: Welcome everyone. Thank you for your interest and efforts on advancing our understanding of the science of trust, one of the most important topics of our time. It's my privilege to greet you today on behalf of the Journal of Communication in Healthcare: Strategies, Media, and Engagement in

Global Health, a peer-reviewed publication, which publishes innovative research, interventions, and perspectives on health communication in all areas of healthcare, public health, global health, and medicine.
At the Journal, we also recognize the intersecting nature of health and community development and try to bring this perspective to our work. Finally, we are strongly committed to equity, diversity, and inclusion. We are also committed to explore the role of communication in advancing health equity and other human rights issues.
Trust is one of the most important factors in human life and affects all of the different domains of our society. We believe in the role of communication, research, policy, and practice in building or restoring trust in science, health, and other information.
We launched the Journal's The Science of Trust [3] Initiative in 2021 as part of a series of dedicated pieces, including an interview with Dr. Mike Ryan and Melinda Frost of the World Health Organization [4]. This is not a new topic in the Journal! Over the years, we have been exploring the role of trust and mistrust

CONTACT Renata Schiavo jcih.editorsTF@gmail.com © 2022 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

@RenataSNYC

2

R. SCHIAVO ET AL.

in shaping communication interventions and informing communication effectiveness. However, this has become an increasingly important topic.
In fact, if there is anything that keeps me awake at night, it is the ongoing global trust crisis about scientific and medical information. Not only are misinformation and disinformation increasingly rampant on social media and in our communities, schools, and workplaces, but people's vulnerability to misinformation and disinformation is also contributing to issues of trust [2]. This has been affecting everyone during the pandemic. It also affects vaccine acceptance rates. We also know that for centuries, misinformation and disinformation have fueled social discrimination and bias, and have also fueled stigma toward mental health issues, obesity, and other medical conditions [2,5].
Also, trust in government, local public health departments, science and clinical experts, and other official sources of health information has been eroding over time, even before the pandemic [2,4,5,6]. We are in the midst of a trust crisis, which should not be a surprise because of the many health, racial, and social inequities that have been eroding our collective sense of community and social justice [2].
As trust is among the most important factors in human life, it pertains to all domains of society. We believe in the role of communication research, policy, and practice to promote trust and encourage behavioral and social change at the community, patient, and population levels [2,5,6]. The Science of Trust Initiative at the Journal seeks to bring together scholars such as yourselves from a variety of disciplines in the health and behavioral and social sciences to engage in an evidence-based exploration of issues of trust and mistrust.
The Initiative will include roundtable discussions, special issues, and article collections. We focus primarily on encouraging research scholarship, and fostering consensus on best practices and future directions in building or restoring trust in healthcare, medicine, public health, and other kinds of scientific information. We also focus on identifying key social and political determinants and behaviors that may lead to trust or mistrust among specific groups and communities.
We also seek to discuss the role of communities, community engagement, and community-based participatory research in informing our collective thinking on how to build and restore trust. As always, we are very concerned with populations and groups that have been marginalized or experienced other kinds of disadvantage, and therefore have historical reasons for their mistrust. Such groups will be the main focus of our Science of Trust Initiative.
Today's roundtable discussion is the first formal event in The Science of Trust Initiative [3]. We are

privileged to have you all with us today, and we're really thankful for that.
Our first question for the panel is to ask you all to introduce yourselves and to focus not only on your name, title, and affiliation, but also on that `one thing' that makes you interested in exploring future directions on the Science of Trust, as well as some examples from your own research or practical experience on the topic.
Dr. Gil Eyal: My name is Gil Eyal. I'm a professor of sociology at Columbia University, and for a long, long time, I wasn't interested in trust, may I say. My interest began because I was writing a book back in 2017/2018, it came out in 2019, it's called The Crisis of Expertise [7]. My interest has always been in experts: The sociology of experts, the role that experts play in society. As I was writing this book, I realized I could not leave out a chapter about trust, and that led me to focus on trust. This is still prior to the pandemic, but we had Brexit, we had the Trump Administration's attempt to shape what the regulatory agencies were doing. We had concerns about vaccination, et cetera. That's what led me to it.
Then, following that, I organized a Mellon-Sawyer Seminar on Trust and Mistrust in Experts and Science at Columbia, during which we held several events in the Bronx, especially on the issue of trust in the medical system, and trust in vaccination among minority groups. Finally, we organized an exhibit at the Forum at Columbia about community health workers and their role in securing trust. We are starting a new center at Columbia, which is tentatively called the Trust Collaboratory.
Dr. Rafael Obregon: Thank you, Renata, and good morning, everyone. I'm Rafael Obregon. I'm currently the UNICEF representative in Paraguay, but my career has been 25 plus years in Health and Development Communication. I have worked for various agencies, WHO, UNAIDS, UNICEF, and also have been an associate professor in Colombia and in the United States, where I also directed the Communication for Development Studies program at Ohio University. I've been working in this field for a long time, and I think that trust has always been at the core of the work that we do. Although, it's been only in the last few years that it has taken such prominence, especially, as a follow-up to some of the outbreaks and pandemics that we have been witnessing.
Certainly, when we go back, for instance, to HIV, it was already a huge part of the work that was done at the time. I also think that trust is an issue that comes across not only health issues, but also any development topic that we can think about. It drives

interactions and intersections with other fields, with institutions, with people, with communities, and so on. In my work, especially around issues related to Ebola and Zika, again, it has been clearly at the center of our response.
Certainly, in terms of my own experience, it's one of the areas where we tend to focus on perhaps in the midst of the emergency or the situation that we're facing, but not necessarily as a core element of the work that we do on a sustained basis. I think that's where we need to make some important changes, in terms of ensuring that trust is embedded in the work that we do in communications, or in any other relevant fields from the very beginning.
Dr. Helen Riess: My name is Helen Riess. I'm an Associate Professor of Psychiatry at Harvard Medical School. As a clinical and research psychiatrist. I see patients and have direct information about the importance of trust in their care. I also direct the Empathy and Relational Science Program at Mass General Hospital, which is a research group that studies empathic communication and its effects on cultural groups, health outcomes, and patient experience [8,9].
I founded Empathetics, Inc. to be able to help scale up education for medical professionals in the critical communication skills and attitudes that healthcare providers need in order for patients to trust them and obtain better health outcomes.
There is no credible way to separate empathy and trust. Last year, I was asked to give a keynote on the intersection of empathy and trust at the Menninger Clinic's National Mental Health Symposium: `Trust and Trustworthiness'. This topic was especially meaningful because of the inherent difficulties some patients with mental illness have with trusting others, and how critical it is to treat patient with such difficulties with care and respect. I realized that if we truly empathize with and understand other people, they will very likely come to trust us, but if we are giving misinformation or trying to coerce patients or not understanding their needs, there will be no trust. Empathy and trust in my view are pivotal, because they not only help at the patient level, but they also help organizations provide better work environments. Trust fosters greater openness and transparency between any two people, or between organizations and their constituencies.
Trust invites greater collaboration. It enables increased sharing of materials, information, communication, and processes, so that we can generate flows of new ideas, creativity, and productivity. Trust also helps reaffirm organizational identities as those that people can have confidence in their credibility and reliability. It enhances cohesiveness, and it improves flexibility in people's capacity to learn and adapt. It's intricately related to all aspects of healthcare. On an interpersonal

JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATION IN HEALTHCARE

3

level, patients simply will not follow recommendations from providers whom they can't trust. Lack of trust and empathic connection are among the most common factors leading people to disregard recommendations, to not fill prescriptions, lose faith in their healthcare providers and their own capacity to improve their lives and to abandon healthcare care altogether.
Our society must create standards and accountability for honest and credible healthcare recommendations from government agencies to individual medical professionals. The crisis of trust must be addressed at the foremost levels of government, or the social contract will continue to fray and lose all meaning. When governments are in a state of uncertainty because of novel threats to society's health, they must communicate with honesty and humility, and notify the public that accurate scientific recommendations can only be gleaned by studies that must be replicated. The public must be informed that recommendations may change based on new information. The tendency to provide certainty when the world is in a state of ambiguity erodes trust and leads to greater dissemination of misinformation, which creates greater chaos and confusion, and undermines societal resilience and faith in society as a whole [10].
Dr. Sandra Quinn: I'm Sandra Quinn. I am Professor and Chair of the Department of Family Science, School of Public Health, University of Maryland, College Park, and Senior Associate Director of the Maryland Center for Health Equity.
First, I would like to echo everything our colleagues have said already about the critical importance of trust, the need for empathy, and human connection with communities that may have long histories of distrust in science, medicine, or health. I began my work initially on the legacy of the Tuskegee Syphilis Study when I was in graduate school, and saw how that study impacted trust within Black communities. Trust, not just in public health interventions, such as vaccines, but also trust and willingness to participate in research.
Over the years through my work during H1N1 in 2009, and subsequently on a couple of NIH grants, all focused on trust and vaccines, I have seen that trust is multidimensional. When we use trust, we need to be specific about type of trust to which we refer. Our work overtime on our NIH grant helped tease out different dimensions of trust with regard to vaccines, and I think that's important [11,12].
I will also echo what I think Gil initially said about community health workers. We have done extensive work with communities here in Prince George's County and have seen the payoff of all those years of work - particularly during H1N1 and Coronavirus. The issue is that building relationships and building

4

R. SCHIAVO ET AL.

the capacity of community health workers and other trusted people, be the barbers, beauticians, pastors, the Church lady from down the street takes time, energy, and sustained engagement. Building their capacity to address issues around vaccines, other health issues, and to be key community ambassadors is critical.
Also, I wanted to call your attention to, I am currently chairing a committee at the National Academies, and it is on building public trust in public health emergency preparedness and response science [13]. We are focused very much on all the dimensions that have fed mistrust, particularly during this pandemic, but broader than that, and then what are some of the critical things we need to do.
Finally, where I am and where I think many of us in the workshop are, is that when we speak of trust, we don't often speak of trustworthiness, and what does trustworthiness look like? How does a health department show itself to be trustworthy? How do big academic health centers show themselves to be trustworthy rather than assuming the problem is out there in various communities? What do we do or don't do that may either help build trust or damage trust? This is an area of passionate interest for me [14].
Dr. Renata Schiavo: Many of you have already alluded to your own experience on the topic. With this question, we would like to tease out some of these stories. How do you relate to this topic either professionally or personally as well as in reference to what you observe among patients, communities, or specific groups with whom you interact or that you serve or represent? What brought you today and what do you believe we should accomplish today?
Dr. Helen Riess: My work on empathy has largely been focused on the healthcare space and the need for reducing implicit and explicit bias. The need for connecting with people at all levels. The growing emphasis on population health, which means healthcare professionals need to know how to win the trust and cooperation of people that are not like themselves and to cross barriers to really understand the people they serve. Healthcare was our single focus until the murder of George Floyd, when a police chief was looking for some training for his police force. He asked a friend of mine if she knew anybody who worked on improving empathy.
She gave him my book, The Empathy Effect. He read it. Then he called me up, and he said, `Could you come and do some work with my police officers?' It was an opportunity to take the empathy education that we were implementing in health care into a brand-new arena. I realized how few adjustments needed to be made to actually talk about `Why empathy was so

important I this setting. Why is empathy so critical for anyone working with a community?' Police, especially in many areas of our country, are today, seen much less warriors and more as guardians of their communities.
The expansion from working with of physicians caring for patients to police officers caring for their communities was quite straightforward. It really magnified the exquisite importance of communities being able to trust their police, and for police to start viewing people with openness and curiosity before judging them. We have some amazing stories of what transpired because of this training.
Dr. Rafael Obregon: I'm sure everyone remembers 2015, 2016, the multiple events, meetings, and publications that highlighted the importance of community trust in the context of the Ebola outbreak in West Africa. I remember, in 2016, when I joined the Forum on Microbial Threats, of which I am still a member of their expert technical group, we hosted a workshop that focused precisely on community engagement, risk communication, and trust building. I think this was the first time that the Forum actually focused on this particular issue. We've seen that interest increasing over the last few years.
Then the importance of trust has come up repeatedly in other pandemics and epidemics across the world, but certainly as I said earlier, with more prominence. You probably also saw the recent piece on The Lancet that did this analysis [15]. It's a modeling exercise, but certainly very interesting. That showed that in countries where trust in government and interpersonal trust is higher, the levels of infections and fatal infections actually were much lower. I think that this also adds to the evidence both quantitative and qualitative on how critical trust is to the work that we do. I think that one of the elements that is missing when we speak about trust is how operationally, or how in practice, trust is built.
We tend to talk about trust as an overarching concept, but when it comes to the interactions, I think it's about precisely many of the topics, or words, terms that we have mentioned already. It's about human connection. It's about dialogue. It's about listening. It's about persisting in the sense of knowing that one interaction will not be enough to actually build trust. It's a very time-consuming, if you wish, exercise, but it's necessary in order to build that trust. I think that when it comes to a lot of the work that we do, there's a tendency to find magic bullet solutions.
In the field of communication, the `magic bullet' approach is very problematic because the immediate, or the default action is to push messages out, to push information out, without facilitating that set of interactions, and looking at very specific aspects of

what it means to be trustworthy. We can get into the more specific elements of what trust means operationally, but ultimately, we need to unpack what trust means in different contexts, in different interactions, because it may take different forms. I think this is one of the critical issues.
You are asking, for example, Renata. I want to bring up the work that we have been doing with indigenous communities in the context of the COVID-19 response in Paraguay. Mistrust in the existence of COVID-19 and then vaccine hesitancy has been a part of our challenges in getting indigenous communities to accept the vaccines against COVID-19. What is taken really, is that interaction, is that dialogue, is that opportunity to create the space for building that trust as part of the process, as opposed to a one-off type of information provision exercise.
We've done many, many things in that context, including the creation of a network of indigenous communicators who actually speak to their own communities, in their own languages. We have been addressing misperceptions or mistrust issues from their own worldview and paid careful attention to how they see a lot of issues unfolding in their own communities. I think that's one concrete example of how we have used the dialogue process that is needed to build trust among specific communities.
Dr. Sandra Quinn: These are all really interesting and compelling stories. I'll share a few things from our COVID experience. In 2011, we started working with local Black barber and beauty shops here in the Prince George's County area. Because we have known for a long time and had implemented similar health promotion interventions for 10 years in Pittsburgh, we know that churches, barber, and beauty shops are the real hubs of the community with diverse clients. You can have the sanitation worker and you can have the judge all in the same shop.
We built on 10 years of work for addressing COVID19 issues. I think that's really what many of us know at this point, is that long-term community engagement relationships are important. During the pandemic, from literally day one, we were having daily contact with the barbers and beauty stylists about the pandemic. `What was this virus?' was one of the questions. We were able to engage with the topics they were hearing, and they were skeptical about, as many in the Black and Latino communities were.
To help them and our communities with understanding the pandemic, we engaged with webinars and Zoom sessions, bringing experts and community members together to talk, asking real questions and having an open discussion. We did this beginning in March 2020 and are still doing it. We were also able to work with a colleague who works on airborne virus transmission research, so he provided test kits

JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATION IN HEALTHCARE

5

for all of the shops so that they could test the staff in the shops routinely. They were contributing to the science, and at the same time, understanding their risks. We provided masks as well. Then, the vaccines came - and we were able then to reach out to some of the hospital systems and say, `We have the immunization spot if you bring the vaccines.'
Immunizing people in the shops meant that people came in saying things like, `I'm not sure I would've gone to any place else to do this, but I trust you, Katrina, or you, Mike, that this is okay to do.' Our barbers and stylists became real vaccine advocates. It is our fear now, that the country has declared this pandemic `over', which all of us know is not the case. We fear that some of the hospital systems and others that stepped forward to implement communitybased clinics, may lose interest or just not have the resources to do that anymore. That's where I think we have a high risk of damaging trustworthiness and taking us backwards, where right now we are moving forward.

Dr. Gil Eyal: I don't have a compelling personal story, but I think there's a moral in it. As I said earlier, what attracted me to the topic was the perception that there is an increasing amount of mistrust in experts, science, and vaccines, which led me to the topic. Then I quickly realized that this is the wrong question to ask, and the wrong way to start on this topic. This is the dilemma of the science of trust, is that the budgets are there and the interest is there, and people become interested in the topic because there's a perception of mistrust, and they're concerned about mistrust and there is a moral panic about mistrust.
Yet, you won't understand anything, and you will not secure trust if that's where you start. If you start with a question of mistrust, you are communicating to people that you're only interested in them, because they're, well, mistrusting. That you're only there because you want them to trust, and they immediately get the sense of, `Well, why do they want us to trust so much?' For me, it was for purely, I'd say, theoretical reasons. It became clear to me that I should put the question of mistrust aside and be much more interested in the question of `What is trust?'. Then, opening up this question turned out to be quite a big issue that is not easy to resolve.
It really resonated with me what everybody else said earlier, especially what Rafael said, because we are drawn to this topic because of mistrust, but the only way to understand trust or to build it, is to be there for the long haul and to be interested in people. That's why when I started to do a little bit more practical work on this, the first people we went to were community health workers. Some of the things we did, for example in the photo voice project I mentioned before, is to ask them to pick a picture

6

R. SCHIAVO ET AL.

from their own media stream that speaks to them about trust. Then talk about this picture and write about it.
The exhibit was really powerful as they had a lot of things to say about what trust means to them, and how do they go about addressing it in their everyday work. One last point ... we are a panel of experts about the science of trust, but the true experts are the people who do it every day at the access points, in the clinics, and on the ground. Part of the science of trust is to learn from them, to devise good ways of learning from them.

Dr. Renata Schiavo: Thank you very much for all of your insights. I really appreciate also that many of you spoke about the importance of communities, because we know that trust starts with truth and ends with truth, especially among communities with whom we may need to make amend because of past wrongdoings that affect trust. There is no expert better than community members to tell us what trust is about.
Dr. Helen Riess: I'd like to share the story to which I alluded because I think it's really powerful to illustrate how trust is really built one relationship at a time. I liked Sandra's example of the barbers and the salons and how we change perspectives by demonstrating reliability and credibility with people. The story I'd like to share is about the empathy work we did with one police department.
A police chief wrote this story for the local paper. After participating in our empathy education workshops, one of his officers stopped a motorist who had gone through a red light. That motorist was African American and transgender, and the police officer was white. When he stopped the driver, the person started saying `The only reason you stopped me is because of what I look like. I know you're prejudiced,' [which is what many people in the Black and transgender communities legitimately feel because of past experiences and the long history of marginalization and bias]. The police officer had learned to just listen, to not start with confrontation, and so he let the driver speak about their fears about why they were stopped. He kindly said, `Do you want to know why I stopped you? It's because you went through a red light, and it has nothing to do with how you look. Were you aware that you went through the red light?' Because of the police officer's connection and demeanor, the person said, `I thought it was yellow, but yeah,' And then said, `Yes.' The person acknowledged going through the red light.
Because of this dialogue, the transgender person later called the police department and said, `I don't know what you're doing there, but I've never been

treated with so much respect by a police officer.' Once you develop a community of trust by treating people with humanity and respect, you start to open the door to the possibility of changing perspectives and attitudes. I want to emphasize the point about how real change happens one relationship at a time, and how important it is to invest in each individual conversation.
Dr. Renata Schiavo: Thank you, Helen, for reminding us of the importance of interpersonal relationships as well as listening. With that said, we also know that at the community and population level, there are a number of social, political, and economic factors that influence whether an entire community or population may trust or not official sources. This is part of our purpose here today as well. I want to ask the panel, what kinds of social and political barriers did you observe among patients, community, and other groups who engage with health and science information?
This is a multidimensional question. What do you see as an important research gap in exploring the role of social and political barriers in shaping trust/mistrust? How do we get started? What are some effective communication strategies in addressing such barriers (including lessons learned, research questions, and opportunities) and advancing health, racial, and social equity?
Dr. Rafael Obregon: I think it goes back to the question of why are we here today? What can we do? I had seen that example of the barber shops; we actually had a presentation in one of the Forum's workshops about how barber shops have supported community health interventions in Baltimore and other cities in the USA. Also, in New York, and in many other places, the engagement of barber shops or hair stylists has been a very effective intervention in addressing violence against women, in terms of identifying instances of violence, getting women to open up and talk about it, encouraging them to report violence and perpetrators, and so on. It's there, it is within the community. That level of trust somehow can lead to that change as Helen is saying.
However, here in Paraguay, we tried to do that, and we had limited success thus far. Part of the challenge - in the context of COVID-19 - is how much the public health system actually considers those interventions as interventions that are worth investing in. In a context where most people have a strong focus on clinical interventions, diagnostics, vaccines, and so on, these kinds of interventions tend to be seen quite differently, and perhaps not as important, when in fact, they are at the core of that change we have been discussing.

JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATION IN HEALTHCARE

7

I think, in terms of where we need to go, is also trying to raise the level of importance of interventions that are focused on building trust as well as the importance of making those interventions a key component of the public health system. Where does it fit? This is also linked to broader issues in terms of competencies and trainings, in terms of curricula and university training, and so on. It's part of that ecosystem. I think it's important to look at trust not just as a single issue, but also as part of the ecosystem that is related to public health.
I think we need to look at trust across different levels. If we take let's say, the socio-ecological framework as a point of reference, where does trust fit within the individual relations? Within community relations? Within systems? Within services? And obviously at much broader social and political dimensions. Again, we need to work on it in a systematic way and not as a one-off kind of intervention.
Dr. Gil Eyal: I want to build on what Rafael said. I mean, you asked about the social and political and economic barriers, Renata. To stick to some obvious ones that we know, I mean, there is a history and legacy of discrimination, medical discrimination that is still there. It's not just a history of underrepresentation of minorities in the medical system. All of this is a huge barrier. There's obviously political polarization, at least in the United States, but it is not the only factor that is contributing to mistrust.
We know that intermediaries are important, like community health workers, for example, that trust is built in their interactions, for that matter also, the beauticians, or the hairdressers, et cetera. Obviously, from what Rafael was saying, one of the obstacles is the fact that they're not valued typically, et cetera, et cetera. To get a little bit away from the feel-good sense here, also it is not guaranteed that the intermediaries are always going to trust the system themselves, and to transmit what the system wants them to transmit themselves.
We have a lot of evidence, for example, from the issue of vaccination prior to the pandemic, and during the pandemic too, that you have a lot of skepticism and hesitancy among them. For example, with the MMR vaccine in Britain, the National Health Service health visitors were supposed to go to the homes, talk to the people, and create trust in vaccines. Then it turns out that they themselves did not trust the vaccines. During the pandemic, you had rural hospitals or nursing homes staff themselves who were very skeptical about vaccines.
I think there are tensions. As a sociologist, I would say there are tensions and conflicts of interest built into the intermediary position. For example, when it becomes very, very clear that you are transmitting the message that the system wants you to transmit.

You may lose the trust that you have built in the past because people are saying, `Ah, yeah, now we see yes, yes, you're a trusted messenger for the Biden administration, I don't trust you anymore.' This is a really difficult tightrope to walk, that when you implement a reform that aims to build trust by drawing on the intermediaries, you have to take into account that your reforms can also undermine the trust that they have built over the years. You have to therefore do it in a way that you're always reflexively watching out for these possibilities.
Dr. Helen Riess: I agree with everything that is being said, and I think we can't overlook the importance of accountability in our politicians and in our government when misinformation is distributed and the effect on the population. We heard alarming and dangerous recommendations coming from the President of the United States about injecting bleach, and promoting hydro chloroquine, and ivermectin. Bleach aside, these were medicines that were already shown to be ineffective. When you ask what gaps exist in research, we need to study the effect of misinformation on people's health through epidemiological surveys, population data, and through the EHR [Electronic Health Records]. We need to think of ways to hold our government officials accountable when they disseminate misinformation.
Dr. Sandra Quinn: I agree. I think there's been a lot of research, including I and some colleagues had an NIH study looking at misinformation, especially from social media. When it comes from the President of the United States, it's a whole other problem, as we all know.
I have been thinking of a couple of research gaps: one, what are effective intervention tools to reduce susceptibility to misinformation, or to prepare a resilient population that can withstand that kind of onslaught, because it is an onslaught of misinformation.
Also, in terms of another research gap, if we think about our institutions, whether in health care, the police, and/or the government, what does it take for populations to see those institutions as trustworthy? We're talking about institutional change. We're talking about training providers, even about investment strategies. There is a whole array of things that we haven't really explored - what would a solid, trustworthy, say, academic health center or big medical system look like? And what does it take to get there? I think that's a gap.
Also, we know that elected officials can tend to want to reassure the public prematurely in an emergency. We've not really focused, I think, on an effective look at what would take to train elected officials and public officials to speak more effectively

8

R. SCHIAVO ET AL.

about emergencies, about crises, and about science. We know that helping them to understand uncertainty, and what that means in these kinds of situations, is important.
Finally, we need to take a better look at how we can work more effectively with the media. What would that look like? These are critical players, and many of them want to do absolutely the right thing. What do they need? How can we help them communicate science better and increase trust better and more effectively? [13]
Dr. Renata Schiavo: Thank you. Many of you spoke about a variety of social and political factors that influence trust, whether it's implicit or institutional bias or investment priorities in different kinds of public health interventions or the politicization of health and scientific news. We are also interested in effective communication strategies in addressing the kinds of barriers that you have seen in your experience. It would be great if you could comment on such strategies.
Dr. Rafael Obregon: When speaking about research gaps I want to bring back what I said earlier about the need to unpack what trust means. Some interesting work that my colleagues at UNICEF have done, specifically the team working on polio eradication, is this theoretical framework that was developed to understand how trust manifested across different aspects of the program: The overall trust in the program, the trust in vaccinators, trust in polio jobs, and more. They developed this framework that includes elements such as honesty, competence, compassion, morality, which took into account local considerations and contexts.
I think that the framework helped guide a lot of the communication interventions and community engagement activities. We know the story of polio, of course, and we look at it from a broader perspective. This has been an interesting contribution to understanding how trust can be unpacked and how it can guide operationally some of the work that we do. This is one area where perhaps more focus is needed.
Another important research question, going back to a point that either Helen or Sandra raised, is how trust is sustained over time. We have recently co-edited a book with a couple of other colleagues, including Erma Manoncourt, who's also a member of the Journal's Editorial Board. The book, Communication and Community Engagement in Disease Outbreaks: Dealing with Rights, Culture, Complexity and Context, [16] which came out just about a month ago, looks at risk communication and community engagement and how different interventions have dealt with cultural contexts in addressing a variety of issues, including trust. I wrote a piece with one of my colleagues in

Chile, where we looked at the experiences of Paraguay and Chile dealing with the COVID-19 pandemic.
Paraguay started off very, very well. In fact, at the beginning of the pandemic, it was one of the world's examples in terms of how the country had been able to contain the epidemic. Chile instead, despite having more resources, a stronger healthcare system, and so on was really struggling. Yet, five/six months into the pandemic, this changed completely, and Paraguay started facing lots of challenges, lots of issues, whereas Chile began to optimize the response. A lot of this came down to trust issues.
Some of the challenges that Paraguay faced were related to mistrust in some of the decisions made by the government, such as the case of handling of supplies and how the healthcare system was managing resources that were allocated to them. I think that's another dimension that is really important - that trust has to be sustained; it has to be nurtured. I think that's one dimension that we often overlook when working in this area.
Dr. Renata Schiavo: I want to move to our next question, but before I do that, I want to say that I'm very glad many of you mentioned the importance of a variety of `communities' in addressing issues of trust, because this is also a very important topic here at the Journal. In fact, our next roundtable on this topic will convene community leaders from domestic and international settings who work on patient and community outreach to get their input on trust, and what it takes to build or restore it.
I also agree with what Sandra has been saying, that we need to talk about the elements of trustworthiness. For example, we know from the COVID-19 pandemic and other past or ongoing experiences that `trust starts with the truth and ends with the truth,' and that the engagement of communities, patient groups, and other stakeholders is key to build or restore trust. This is very important, especially for communities that have been historically marginalized or experience any other kinds of bias and discrimination. Can you please share your own experiences (if any) with community or patient engagement and discuss lessons learned, future directions, and implications for health and risk communication? How do we get started in characterizing issues of trust/mistrust among specific communities, patient groups, and populations?
Dr. Sandra Quinn: Something I was thinking about as you were posing your question was, what were some of the strategies that were used? The pandemic certainly didn't lend itself to establishing a research

JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATION IN HEALTHCARE

9

agenda as easily as we were all working to address immediate needs. I think we often assume that we cannot effectively counter misinformation and sometimes we think that community members will not understand the science that supports what we are doing. What we have found instead is that it goes back to empathy, respectfully listening to `the hoax, it's a hoax, the vaccine will insert chips in you,' all of those things. Letting it all emerge has enabled us to say, `Let's look at this another way.'
I think that in the communication process, listening skills for researchers and practitioners may prompt more effective ways to interact - other than the direct knee jerk, which many of us may instinctively feel, `How can you believe these things?'. In fact, people do believe them, and we've known that for years. Another area on which we focused, and this poses a question for us, is really to break down a lot of the science on vaccines. How they were developed, what they were, how they worked, who was in the trials, because those were questions, we really wanted. I think they really wanted to understand. We brought together researchers working on the COVID vaccine trials, physicians, and other scientists with community members to demystify the science and answer questions.
The main question in communication is how we effectively communicate science to people with diverse educational backgrounds in ways that's understandable and translatable for them? I think that's an important issue because it really made a difference.
Dr. Helen Riess: I was thinking along the same lines; how important it is to meet people. What really matters to people is to get reassurance and to believe that the person talking to them cares about them. That's done through listening, non-judgment, and respect. I think many people want to find a shortcut to `just open your brain and I'll dump in the right knowledge, and then we're good.' As Sandra says, it takes a while to really listen to what people believe and then to say, `I understand why you believe that. You've been hearing that on television,' and then find an opening, `Would you be open to hearing another point of view?'
Part of the problem with building trust is that people want to get there quickly and it's not a quick fix. Everyone wants quick fixes today. I think the attitudes of curiosity, openness, respect, and non-judgment have to precede any new information that we're trying to impart to people. We also need to explain the science in to simple, understandable concepts.
Dr. Gil Eyal: I just wanted to push back a little bit against this `trust starts with truth and end with truth.' I understand the point, it's a simple point, that you cannot secure trust without honesty or by lying and by some sort of secrecy. However, as a sociologist,

I would say that it's almost the opposite. Truth starts with trust and ends with trust in the sense that any scientific fact, any medical truth, the moment you probe it, you immediately discover how much of it we take on trust, including the scientists involved. There's a lot of research on this concept, and I highly recommend Steven Shapin's A Social History of Truth [17], which makes this point powerfully.
That means that when you present people with that information, they'll have valid questions, and you can't answer all those questions. I agree with everything people were saying here, the importance of dialogue, importance of being open to questions, and finding ways of answering them to some extent. However, it's not just between trust and mistrust. I want to emphasize that the real important distinction is between responsible trust and blind faith. People always look and search for how can I trust in a responsible way, how can I demonstrate to others that I am trusting responsibly and I'm not taking something as blind faith?
If it appears to ourselves or to others that we are taking something on blind faith, we need to give people the tools to make that distinction and to be able to convince themselves and others that they can trust responsibly and it's not a matter of just blind faith.
Dr. Renata Schiavo: Thank you very much, Gil, for providing this very interesting perspective about truth starting with trust. The reference to `trust starting with truth' is very relevant for communities that have been marginalized or under-resourced as you said. At least in my opinion, in these instances, we cannot avoid discussing the history of exploitation and marginalization if we want to build or restore trust. I really appreciate the sociology perspective, which reverts the paradigm and is very interesting and thought-provoking. Thanks for offering that, Gil.
Dr. Renata Schiavo: I am moving to our next question. While several models and frameworks for social and behavior change communication already exist, these are not widely implemented as we need them to be at the community, patient, and population levels. I know Rafael and I have been often discussing this issue. I also like his reference to the socio-ecological model of health, which provides a useful framework to organize communication interventions. With that said, how do we mainstream the integration of existing frameworks and models in addressing the global trust crisis and other related topics? What's missing and how do we go about addressing potential gaps across organizations and professionals while also empowering local communities and patients?

10

R. SCHIAVO ET AL.

Dr. Rafael Obregon: Thank you, Renata. I think I already made some observations about this in one of my previous interventions. The truth is that we've seen this history repeated many times right now. So, unless we create or set up community-based platforms that contribute to ongoing dialogue and engagement with communities, we will see this repeated again. When I say communities, let's think about different spaces. We can think about communities in the more commonly understood way, but also looking at, let's say, a health service, made of users and providers, who together become a community in a way.
In any space that we can think of we should build those communities, those dialogue spaces where interaction can be fostered on a regular basis, so then when we have challenging issues to address there is already some basis of trust or some elements of trust already built in. In many ways, this is my perspective of what's missing. If we look at humanitarian responses or emergency responses, building trust quickly, as it's been said, is very difficult.
If we haven't done that work for a long time, it's going to be extremely challenging to do it within a very short timeframe. I think that remains a huge gap. If we look at the investments that the world community makes in responding to emergencies or humanitarian situations versus what is invested in building platforms for trust and engagement, it is really surprising how little is invested in building those platforms and community spaces. I think that's, for me, one of the huge issues, and communication is at the core of that process.
Dr. Helen Riess: There's a lot of conversation about building platforms to increase connectivity and communication. We need to think about going to where the people are, and then assessing their desire for a platform to communicate as opposed to, `Hey, we have a platform, but if no one's really feeling the need for that platform, it's going to sit there.' The way to approach communities is to go where people are gathering, whether it's their church, their community center, their eldercare centers, or their daycare centers, and start talking with them about how they would like to get information. Because there's a vast number of platforms out there but until people need them or know about them, they're not going to use them.
Dr. Gil Eyal: Again, and these things were said, but maybe just in a slightly different way, those places already exist and the personnel to run them already exist. If we're talking about the medical system, the medical system has access points. It has clinics, it has mobile vaccination units, it has all those places. The problem is that often, not the right personnel is there. The personnel are not representative of the

group of patients they serve, so the type of interaction is often warped. They are not listening.
If you have the right people like community health workers, like auxiliary staff that reflect the makeup and values of the community, if you give them time, if you support these people; you pay them better, you train them better, you communicate that they are valued and supported, then they can do this work. Finally, trust is a little bit like music in the sense that variables of time, of temporality are really important. Warp speed doesn't build trust, you need to be there for the long haul, but also sequence matters.
I'm primed to trust the CDC, but when the CDC says one thing, and then almost immediately say, `Oops, no. Actually, this,' I'm not primed to trust them anymore. Sequence, rhythm, speed, consistency - all those things really matter an enormous amount. They matter especially because unless they are considered and properly addressed, they would make the work of the people at the access point so much more difficult. They know that they will lose what they built over a very long period of time if they really need to communicate something completely different from what they did. Lack of attention to their positions, their incentives, their situation, their interest - that is one of the big obstacles.
Dr. Sandra Quinn: I would echo much of what has been said. This requires a long-term investment of energy and resources, and the recognition that in the communities in which we've been talking about, how our institutions treat the people from those communities translates into how much trust we have in those communities. I think Gil alluded to that, I think that's incredibly important and we forget that frequently. Thank you for this opportunity.
Dr. Renata Schiavo: Thank you. I'm going to ask the last few questions, focusing primarily on your recommendations for future research and practice in the field of communication. How do you feel the different areas we spoke about, whether it's empathy or communication frameworks for social and behavior change (SBCC) or inclusiveness or community engagement or sociology or the importance of listening or other topics need to be integrated in communication research, policy, and practice? What are your recommendations for communication research, policy, and practice, and how do we move forward with understanding the science of trust?
Dr. Rafael Obregon: First, I agree with what Helen said. I want to clarify that certainly when I speak about platforms, those platforms need to be based on the community assets, the community-based communication resources that are already in place, that they're embedded in those communities. This should

JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATION IN HEALTHCARE

11

be about leveraging those existing platforms more than building new platforms.
Then, in terms of the recommendations, I think it would be really important to think about recommendations on different levels.
One, at policy level, how do we integrate a more specific focus on community-based interventions within public health systems, including a strong focus on trust, as we have been speaking? Second, I think in terms of practice, it's important to really invest in these community-based interventions and certainly generate critical data about the criticality of those interventions. I think we need to do more just to make sure that those investments are made in a sustained manner. The third point is about strengthening capacities. Strengthening capacities of different key actors that make decisions at the policy level or service or community level.
I think that needs to be part of the conversation especially within academic institutions, but also within other kinds of institutions that do apply work and have, again, a deliberate focus on strengthening capacity to do community engagement well and on a sustained basis. I would put those three recommendations forward.
Dr. Sandra Quinn: I concur with what's been stated. I think the other thing that we really need to consider, particularly for this conversation at the Journal, is what is effective training for healthcare workers, and all the auxiliary workers that interact with communities, how do we train them to foster relationships and build trust? The other thing that is critically important is that we assume that all of us can do this work, we assume that other researchers are good at doing this.
Instead, there needs to be much more work on training researchers on how to effectively work with communities in regard to any type of research and certainly on communication research and practice as a place where we can set a standard for how to build a trusting relationship. I think there's one other thing that's a critical part of this and that we rarely discuss, and that is that much of the research that does address some of these issues is NIH research - it's short-term, and these are not short-term efforts. These are long-term efforts in the extent to which our institutions do not support community engagement typically, it's usually on the back of the principal investigator to do that.
That's a flaw within our academic institutions, our healthcare and research institutions, and our funding agencies. It requires longer than a three-year RO1 to do all of this work well.
Dr. Helen Riess: The word `humility' really stood out to me in a previous question. I love Gil's research on the crisis of expertise because of his comment about the

CDC saying one thing one day, and then saying another thing the next week. We are in a crisis of confusion and uncertainty, and one of the ways we lose trust is by pretending we know more than we really do. We need to infuse communication efforts with embracing uncertainty and being transparent, `This is the best information we have today. It may change next week, and bear with us as we sift through the data.' That would have gone so far instead of, `This is what the CDC recommends.'
We have to embrace humility, communicate our humility, and share the fact that life is uncertain, and if we try to pretend it's not, people are not going to trust us.
Dr. Gil Eyal: Yes, I would say briefly that I think we also need basic research on trust methodologies. By that, I mean the methods that ordinary people employ in order to trust. We are all experts on trust because we have to do it all the time in our everyday life. We have practical, pragmatic, tacit methods that we employ in order to trust because you cannot go about your life without trusting. When I was teaching a course about trust, my students were telling me, `You know what mistrust is?' They said when you mistrust, you're just trusting somebody else or something else and that's true.
We need research on how people make those decisions in their everyday life so that we can use their own strategies for building trust, communicate about trust and other issues in a way that resonates with their methods.
Dr. Renata Schiavo: Thank you very much, all, for bringing up so many interesting and different points. I want to give everyone the opportunity to share their closing thoughts on the topic. Please share any closing thoughts or any key messages or recommendations you may have on how communication research, policy, and practice may contribute to advance the science of trust and help build or restore trust.
Dr. Helen Riess: I just want to thank you for raising this as one of the true challenges of our time. I attended a transformational digital platform conference at MIT yesterday and it came down to this; we can have all the digital transformation and information and interconnectivity in the world, but if people don't trust us, none of these approaches will work. It was interesting that the conference ended yesterday where we started today. Because of what's happened politically, misinformation and the split between people who believe science and those who don't is only growing. We are talking about one of the most critical healthcare crises of our time, so thank you for focusing on this topic.

12

R. SCHIAVO ET AL.

Dr Gil Eyal: Just one closing thought. There's a word that Rafael and other people used, `resilience.' I think it's more important to build resilience than to try to counter each and every form of misinformation. That can become like a game of Whack a Mole and can appear paternalistic too. `Oh, I tell you this was wrong.' The idea of building resilience is where the key is.
Dr. Renata Schiavo: Thank you. I cannot agree more. How we build resilience against misinformation and disinformation and empower people to act upon evidence-based is also one of my key areas of focus, which we also seek to explore at the Journal.
Dr. Rafael Obregon: Many thanks for the opportunity to engage in this fascinating and timely discussion. A message I want to emphasize in closing is my concern with the increasing focus on behavioral approaches to social and behavior change communication. While we know this is very important, it should not happen at the expense of communitybased approaches and broader social change transformations (you might have seen this recent paper by Chater and Lowenstein which provides a timely analysis about this issue - The i-Frame and the sFrame: How Focusing on Individual-Level Solutions Has Led Behavioral Public Policy Astray by Nick Chater, George Loewenstein - [18]) And when it comes to communication, a heavy focus on behavioral approaches tends to move away from dialogue and engagement.
Dr. Sandra Quinn: First, thank you for doing this because it has been fascinating. I think it is critically important. I think that addressing the research around trust really requires thinking about it in a multitude of dimensions, and then thinking about how do we build the resilience, are critically important steps. I look forward to the next conversation.
Dr. Renata Schiavo: Wonderful! I want to thank each and all of you for your participation and great insights. We look forward to developing the proceedings and recommendations from this forum, and to future conversations.
Key action points and recommendations
Trust is a critical area to be addressed in health, risk, and development communication as it's foundational to health, behavioral, and social change. It is important to recognize that trust can only be built or restored over time and multiple interactions, and cannot be built overnight. Therefore, building or restoring trust should be at the core of all communication efforts

across the intersecting fields of healthcare, public health, global health, medicine, and international development.
Many important points, experiences, and definitions emerged from this roundtable discussion and are all reported in the above section of these proceedings. Key action points and recommendations are outlined below, with a special emphasis on existing research gaps and promising strategies and models that have implications for health and risk communication.
Existing Research Gaps/Areas for Further Exploration
. Understand the multiple dimensions of trust and their contributing factors. This includes the following research areas: o Looking at how trust manifests across different aspects of an intervention (e.g. trust in a program, trust in the vaccinators), as well as identifying key elements contributing to trust (e.g. honesty, competence, empathy, etc.) that can inform communication interventions. A sample framework for this kind of work was developed to inform communication efforts on polio eradication [19] o Exploring the concept of `trustworthiness' and what this may look like at the organizational or interpersonal levels. For example, what do we do or don't do that may either help build trust or damage trust? How can big academic health centers or a health department show themselves to be trustworthy? o Analyze trust issues across different levels (e.g. within individual relations, community relations, systems, services, etc.). As an example, the socio-ecological model of health [20,21] offers a suitable framework to look at trust at different levels of society and inform future interventions. o Understanding how trust is sustained and nurtured over time o Strengthening evidence on the social and political determinants of trust as specific to different communities and groups
. Investigate trust methodologies, with special emphasis on how people make their own decisions, so that we can use their own strategies for building trust and communicating about trust and other relevant issues by using their own methods.
. Strengthen evidence on the impact of misinformation and methods to build resilience among different groups and communities. Sample questions include: o What are the effects of misinformation on people's health? o What are effective tools and intervention strategies to reduce the susceptibility to misinformation and build resilience?

o How do we effectively communicate science to people with diverse educational backgrounds in ways that are understandable to them?
Promising strategies and models
. Centralize and address `trust' at the onset of all kinds of communication efforts as well as part of other work in the health and international development fields. Trust cannot be easily built in the midst of a public health emergency or other time-sensitive work.
. Embrace humility, communicate humility and uncertainty in recognizing the evolving nature of science and health information. Regard cultural humility and empathy as central to all kinds of communication interventions and interactions.
. Recognize that there is a distinction between responsible trust and blind faith, so we need equip people with the tools they need to make that distinction and to convince themselves and others that they can trust responsibly
. Build and sustain long-term relationships, empathy and human connection with local communities as community engagement and mobilization are key to building trust. This is particularly relevant for groups that may have historical reasons for their distrust in science, medicine, or health information. Sample interventions discussed by roundtable participants include community health workers programs, community outreach and mobilization via local barber shops and salons, and other community-based platforms to reach and engage people in their own spaces. Specific action points: o Speak with communities in their own languages and address issues from their own worldview. o Be aware that intermediaries such as community health workers will not always trust the system themselves and consider that they have to juggle the relationships they have built so communities don't lose trust in them. Support them in their endeavors. o Integrate community-based interventions within public health and healthcare systems. Make sure that key access points to healthcare (e.g. clinics, mobile vaccination units) are inclusive of personnel that is representative of the groups they serve.
. Prioritize and invest in community-based interventions as essential not only to pandemic response but also to other health issues. In some contexts, community level interventions that are based on relationship building and long-term interactions are not valued or seen as worth the investment, so we need to raise the value of these interventions to the same level as clinical and diagnostic interventions. Key steps include: (a) promoting a paradigm

JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATION IN HEALTHCARE

13

shift within the grantmaking and policymaking communities; (b) investing in outcome evaluation to strengthen existing evidence on the effectiveness of this kind of intervention; and (c) making sure investment is sustained in the long-term to improve sustainability of all behavioral, social and policy gains. . Strengthen capacity across professional disciplines and sectors to (a) mainstream the integration of frameworks and models for social and behavior change communication (SBCC) in the design, implementation, and evaluation of communication research and interventions; (b) to encourage engagement of different professionals with local communities. o Include trust as a competency in curricula and
training o Tailor capacity building intervention to include
key decision makers at the policy, institutional, service or community levels, o Strengthen capacity for community engagement among researchers. o Focus on essential skills for scientists, researchers and leaders, including empathy, listening skills and humility . Build resilience among patients and local communities to decrease vulnerability to misinformation. Develop suitable resilience-building research and programs instead of trying to counter each and every form of misinformation. . Contextualize behavioral approaches for social and behavior communication within broader community-based interventions and social change transformation. Continue to foster engagement and dialogue with local communities and other key stakeholders.

Summary and conclusion
A key building block of The Science of Trust Initiative at the Journal of Communication in Healthcare: Strategies, Media, and Engagement in Global Health, this roundtable made significant progress toward looking at `trust' and `trustworthiness' from being perceived as a challenge in public health and healthcare during the pandemic to becoming understood as a broad interdisciplinary issue of global importance. Roundtable participants discussed several themes and action steps that support system- and community-driven approaches and are grounded in empathy, humility, equity, and community engagement. Several research gaps were also identified to truly unpack `trust' and its many dimensions, contributing factors, levels of influence, and indicators for long-term sustainability. The role of capacity building and training to equip both communities and

14

R. SCHIAVO ET AL.

professionals from multiple sectors with the tools and skills that are needed to build or restore trust was also discussed. Many stories and examples were also shared to provide practical insights for future directions. Across topics, the participants' concern with addressing health, racial and social inequities and improving the lives of communities worldwide was an underlying topic. While some of the recommendations in these proceedings may have also emerged from other efforts and experiences, their implementation requires political will and leadership at the policy and organizational levels.
These roundtable proceedings have significant implications for health and risk communication - across research, policy, and practice - as well as for researchers, practitioners and policymakers in the public health, healthcare, global health, medicine, and international development fields who are working on the health and human rights issues of our time.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank Melody Harris and Zoe Cross of Taylor & Francis for their support of The Science of Trust Initiative at the Journal. Special thanks also to the Journal's Summer 2022 Communication, Technology and Social Media interns: Mary Kelly Allen, for her support in proofing the original transcript of the roundtable discussion, and Gloria Zucchini who will work on disseminating the discussion and recommendations in this roundtable proceedings.
Disclosure statement
The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose. No funds supported this roundtable discussion and proceedings. The opinions in this article are those of the authors only and do not necessarily represent the official position of the organizations with which the authors are affiliated.
Notes on contributors
Moderator and Roundtable Chair/Organizer
Renata Schiavo, PhD, MA, CCL is the Editor-in-Chief of the Journal of Communication in Healthcare: Strategies, Media, and Engagement in Global Health. A passionate advocate for health equity, she is a Senior Lecturer at Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health, Department of Sociomedical Sciences, the Founder and Board President of Health Equity Initiative, a nonprofit membership organization, and a Principal at Strategies for Equity and Communication Impact, a global consultancy. Her areas of expertise include epidemics,

emerging disease outbreaks and other public health emergencies; health inequities; maternal and child health; immunization; vaccine hesitancy; and building trust in science. She has published extensively on health and risk communication, global health, community-based interventions, and health equity.
Participant
Gil Eyal is Professor of Sociology at Columbia University, where he also is Director of the Trust Project within INCITE (Interdisciplinary Center for Innovative Theory and Empirics). He is the author, most recently, of The Crisis of Expertise (Polity 2019). Among his previous books were The Autism Matrix (Polity 2010) and The Disenchantment of the Orient. (SUP 2006). During 2020-2022, he organized at Columbia a Mellon-Sawyer Seminar on trust and mistrust in science and experts, and also taught an undergraduate course on the same topic.
Participant
Rafael Obregon, PhD is the UNICEF Country Representative in Paraguay since July 2019. Prior, he led UNICEF's Communication for Development Section globally, was an Associate Professor at Ohio University, and worked as Regional Health Communication Specialist for the WHO/PAHO. He has supported several responses to humanitarian situations and to public health emergencies and disease outbreaks, including the 2014-2015 West Africa Ebola Outbreak and the 2016 Zika outbreak. He has published extensively on global health communication and outbreak response. Dr Obregon serves on the editorial board of the Journal of Communication in Healthcare: Strategies, Media, and Engagement in Global Health.
Participant
Sandra Crouse Quinn is Professor and Chair of the Department of Family Science and Senior Associate Director, Maryland Center for Health Equity, School of Public Health, University of Maryland. She has been the PI on CDC, NIH, FDA and foundation grants focused on trust, vaccine acceptance and disparities, and communication. She is currently the Chair of the Planning Committee for a 2022 NASEM Workshop, Building Public Trust in Public Health Emergency Preparedness and Response Science.

JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATION IN HEALTHCARE

15

Participant
Helen Riess is a clinical and research psychiatrist, Associate Professor of Psychiatry at Harvard Medical School and Director of the Empathy Program at Massachusetts General Hospital. Dr Riess founded Empathetics, an organization that provides empathy education for healthcare and law enforcement. She is Author, The Empathy Effect and the TEDx `The power of Empathy TEDX'. Dr Riess and her teams are dedicated to transforming organizational systems into compassionate care systems. Her research has been published in leading medical journals and has won numerous awards.
Co-Organizer
Nikita Boston-Fisher, MPH, PMP is the Senior Editorial Assistant for the Journal of Communication in Healthcare: Strategies, Media, and Engagement in Global Health. She is passionate about health equity and communication. Nikita is a Master Certified Health Education Specialist (MCHES) and has over a decade of project management experience. She founded and hosts a podcast called The Good Health Café, the place to understand health and healthcare in plain language. She works in the Desautels Faculty of Management at McGill University.
References
[1] Riedl R, Javor A. The biology of trust: integrating evidence from genetics, endocrinology, and functional brain imaging. J Neurosci Psychol Econ. 2012;5:63-91.
[2] Schiavo R, Eyal G, Obregon R, Quinn SC, Riess H, BostonFisher N. The `Science of Trust': future directions, research gaps, and implications for health and risk communication. Roundtable proceedings. J Commun Healthc: Strategies. Media Engagem Glob Health. 2022. doi:10. 1080/17538068.2022.2121199.
[3] Journal of Communication in Healthcare: Strategies, Media, and Engagement in Global Health. 2021. About `The Science of Trust' Initiative. [cited 2022 Aug]. Available from: https://bit.ly/3u1oDRB.
[4] Editorial Team JCIH. The `Science of Trust': why we need a multi-faceted approach to inform, engage and empower communities during COVID-19 and beyond. J Commun Healthc. 2021;14(2):93-98. doi:10.1080/ 17538068.2021.1934772.
[5] Schiavo R. 2021. Challenging misinformation: exploring equity- and community-driven strategies. [Webinar Presentation]. Region 2 Public Health Training Center (PHTC). [cited 2021 Sept 7]. Available from: https://region 2phtc.org/2021/10/05/challenging-misinformationexploring-equity-and-community-driven-strategies/.

[6] Schiavo R, Van Wye G, Manoncourt E. COVID-19 and health inequities: the case for embracing complexity and investing in equity- and community-driven approaches to communication. J Commun Healthc: Strateg, Media, Engagem Glob Health. 2022;15(1):1-6. doi:10.1080/17538068.2022.2037349.
[7] Eyal G. The crisis of expertise. Cambridge: Polity Press; 2019.
[8] Lorié Á, Reinero DA, Philips M, Zhang L, Riess H. Culture and nonverbal expressions of empathy in clinical settings: a systematic review. Patient Educ Couns. 2017;100(3):411-424.
[9] Riess H K, Bailey JM, Dunn RW, Phillips M EJ. Empathy training for resident physicians: a randomized controlled trial of a neuroscience-informed curriculum. J Gen Int Med. 2012;27(10):1280-1286.
[10] Riess H. 2021. Institutional resilience: the foundation for individual resilience, especially during COVID-19. Global Advances in Health and Medicine. Available from: https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.11772164956 1211006728.
[11] Jamison A, Quinn S, Freimuth V. `You don't trust a government vaccine': narratives of institutional trust and influenza vaccination among African American and White adults. Soc Sci Med. 2018;221:87-94.
[12] Freimuth V, Jamison A, An J, Hancock G, Quinn S. Determinants of trust in the Flu vaccine for African Americans and Whites. Soc Sci Med. 2017;193:70-79.
[13] National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. Building trust in public health emergency preparedness and response (PHEPR) science: proceedings of a workshop in brief. Washington (DC): The National Academies Press; 2022. doi:10.17226/26658.
[14] Quinn S, Andrasik M. Addressing vaccine hesitancy in BIPOC communities - toward trustworthiness, partnership, and reciprocity. N Engl J Med. 2021. doi:10.1056/ NEJMp21031.
[15] COVID-19 National Preparedness Collaborators. Pandemic preparedness and COVID-19: an exploratory analysis of infection and fatality rates, and contextual factors associated with preparedness in 177 countries, from Jan 1, 2020, to Sept 30, 2021. The Lancet. 2022;399:10334.
[16] Manoncourt E, Obregon R, Chitnis K. Communication and community engagement in disease outbreaks: dealing with rights, culture, complexity and context. The Capital Region of Denmark: Springer; 2022.
[17] Shapin S. A social history of truth. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press; 1994.
[18] Chater N, Loewenstein GF. 2022. The i-Frame and the sframe: how focusing on individual-level solutions has led behavioral public policy astray. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract = 4046264 or. doi:10.2139/ ssrn.4046264.
[19] Polio Endgame Strategy 2019-2023: Eradication, integration, certification and containment. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2019 (WHO/Polio/19.04). Available from: https://polioeradication.org/wp-content/uploads/ 2019/06/english-polio-endgame-strategy.pdf.
[20] Bronfenbrenner U. The ecology of human development. Cambridge (MA): Harvard University Press; 1979.
[21] Bronfenbrenner U. Environments in developmental perspective: theoretical and operational models. Washington (DC): American Psychological Association; 1999.

