Art. Y.- An Experimental Inquiry into the Cause of the Ascent and Descent of the Sap, with some observations upon the Nutrition of Plants, and the Cause of Exosmose and Endosmose. By G. Rainey, m.it.c.s.e.j Demonstrator of Anatomy, and of Microscopic Anatomy, at Saint Thomas's Hospital. With Two Plates.?London, 1847, 12mo,
pp. 52.
This little treatise contains the results of numerous experimental inquiries and microscopic observations, which have been carried on for some time by its able author; and the perusal of it will suggest many new ideas to the vegetable physiologist. We are sorry that want of space prevents us from entering upon a more detailed critical examination of its contents ; particularly as Mr. Rainey's conclusions in regard to the course of the sap runs counter to the views which are commonly entertained on the subject. He considers that he has shown, " First, that the crude sap ascends along a tissue which chiefly exists between the cells, but which
enters also into the structure of the more solid and permanent parts of a plant; and, secondly, that the elaborated fluid, both in its descent and ascent, passes along the ducts and spiral vessels." The first of these
positions is based on the results of experiments on tlie absorption of a solution of bichloride of mercury. These results are not a little curious, and we have no doubt that they are most accurately stated ; but we do not see that they require, or even justify, the inferences founded upon them, opposed as these are by so many other reasonings, based on structural arrangements, as well as by actual observation of the process. We cannot understand what Mr. Rainey means by the ascent of elaborated sap, as distinguished from that of the crude sap, or by elaboration taking place in the roots. Every vegetable physiologist knows that in spring the ascending sap is charged with a considerable amount of gummy and saccharine matters, which it has derived from the starchy deposits laid up in the roots at the end of the previous season; but the presence of these does not seem to us to deprive the liquid of its character as " crude sapand the fact is unquestionable, that this liquid rises through the large open ducts which most woody stems possess. We believe that Mr. Rainey is perfectly justified in his assertion that the " spiral vessels" not unfrequently communicate with each other, and serve for the conveyance of fluid; but we
believe also, from our own observations, that the fact of non-communica-
tion is more common, and that the closed spiral vessels, at certain periods of their life, at least, contain air only. N We recommend Mr. Rainey's treatise to all who are interested in the inquiries of which it treats.

