550

Chronicle of Medical Science.

[April,

QUARTERLY REPORT ON MIDWIFERY. By Robert Baknes, M.D. Lond.
PHYSICIAN TO THE ROYAL MATERNITY CHARITY.
I. Physiology and Pathology of tile Unimpregnated Female. 1. Researches on the Erectile Organs of Woman, and on the Muscular Tulo-
ovarian Apparatus, in their Relations with Ovulation and Menstruation. By Charles Bonget. (Brown-Sequard's Journ. de Physiol., October, 1858.) 2. On the Functions of the Placenta. By Dr. Cl. Bernard. (Gaz. Hebdom., Jail. 1859.) 3. Note on Hcemorrhages of the Fallopian Tubes. By Albert Ptjeck. (Gaz. Hebdom., Jan. 1859.) 4. Extirpation of an Inverted Uterus by Fcrasement. By Dr. McClintock. (Dublin Quart. Journ. of Med. Science, Peb. 1859.)
1. M. Charles Bonget's interesting researches on the anatomy of the female organs are summed in the following propositions :
1. In woman the body of the uterus presents the structure of an erectile organ, of a true corpus spongiosum.
2. That to the ovary also an erectile bulb is attached.
3. That in all the classes of vertebrata, and especially in all mammifera, a special muscular apparatus embraces the oviduct and ovary, and effects their adaptation to each other.
4. That the fasciculi of the ovario-tubal muscular membranes (mesoarium and mesometriuni) have such relations with the corpora spongiosa, and especially with their efferent sinuses, that, at the moment of contraction, the meshes of the network in the midst of which run the venous channels, contracting in every direction, these must necessarily be compressed, and the discharge of blood more or less completely stopped.
5. That the contraction of the ovario-tubal muscular apparatus persisting during the whole period of ovulation, the obstacle to the passage of blood and the erection of the corpora spongiosa of the uterus and ovary, which is the result, have the same duration.
6. That menstruation coinciding also, on the other hand, with ovulation, it
is natural to consider it as the immediate consequence of the erection of the
uterus; a true menstrual haemorrhage, moreover, never presenting itself but where the uterus possesses a truly erectile structure.
7. That if sexual excitation, as seems probable, can determine the erection of the uterus and ovary, it is easy to account by that fact for the coincidence of the periods of menstruation and ovulation.
2. Dr. Claude Bernard has communicated to the Societe de Biologie, of Paris, an account of some researches on the function of the placenta. He had some time before announced the presence of glucose in the amniotic fluid. In pursuing his researches into the origin of this substance, he found that the placenta of certain mammifera contains in the normal state a considerable quantity of glycogenic matter, lluminants alone seemed to offer an exception; but M. Bernard now finds that in these the glycogenic matter, instead of being met with in the placentas, has its productive organs in certain points of the amnios. The glycogenic matter of foetal age, whatever the species under examination, is formed by cellules, which in all their histological characters are exactly similar
to the cellules of the liver of adult animals. In the rodents these cellules are
formed between the foetal placenta and the maternal placenta. In ruminants, there are seen on the amnios whitish spots, which have either been completely

1859.]

Quarterly Report on Midwifery.

551

Eossible overlooked by observers, or taken for epithelial pathological productions. These
white spots are composed of agglomerations of cellules similar to the preceding. On microscopical examination of these spots, they are seen to be composed of a kind of papilla; filled with cells, and circumscribed by an amorphous membrane. Iodine gives a rose colour to the cellular contents. The layer of cells separating the foetal and maternal placentas in rodents, and the papillae containing the cells in ruminants, are developed from the earliest epoch of foetal life, ana immediately enter upon their functions. Like the hepatic cells in form, their function is similar?at least, as far as the production of glycogenic matter is concerned, for the author has not yet concluded his researches relative to the
secretion of bile by these organs. It is a true liver, absolutely unknown itherto. Whilst these organs are in function, the internal liver of the foetus is in a rudimentary state; its cells, perfectly embryonic, produce neither glycogenic matter nor glucose. Later they change their appearance, take gradually their normal shape and dimensions, and begin to secrete glycogenic matter. At the same time, the hepatic cells of the placenta or of the amnios become atrophied, and disappear.
3. M. Albert Pueck, house-surgeon to the Hotel Dieu at Toulon, makes an interesting communication on haemorrhages of the Fallopian tubes. He cites the following cases:
1st. A married woman was attacked with small-pox; when admitted into hospital she complained of acute pain in the lower part of the lumbar region and towards the sacrum, and this although she had menstruated a fortnight before. She rolled about in the bed screaming. Two days later, she was seized with profuse uterine haemorrhage, and died almost suddenly. On examination, the uterus was found full of clots; the mucous membrane was quite healthy, except at the fundus, where it was thickened, violet, infiltrated with blood; at this point a clot remained, which stretched into the left Fallopian tube. The tubes were of a violet aspect, of the size of the little finger, and filled with a large vermicular clot. There was not a drop of blood or serosity in the peritoneum. The right ovary presented no rupture, but had a clot the
size of a small walnut on its outer surface. The left ovary, of the size of a
lien's egg, was almost entirely converted into a sac containing a fatty matter and hairs. This case was reported by M. Laboulbene to the Societe de Biologie in 1853; the conclusion being that it was a case of haemorrhage of the Fallopian tubes.
The next case occurred under the observation of M. Pueck himself. A strong, robust woman, aged thirty-eight, was admitted on the 3rd of July, 1858, and died ten years after, of meningeal haemorrhage. The mucous membrane of the uterus was quite healthy; at the level of the left horn were some san-
guinolent mucosities, resembling those contained in the inner half of the corresponding tube. The right tube contained a white opaque mucus, it was fixed to the anterior surface of the ovary; two or three serous cysts the size of a pin's head were on the oviduct; the mucous membrane near the fimbriae was dull red, and pale elsewhere. The left tube was violet, as if ecchymosed ; its outer third was as large as the index finger; the fimbriated end was widely open, and connected with the ovary by a tubular membrane continued from it, forming a complete canal to the ovary. This portion was dilated by sanguinolent mucosities, and on pressure escaped from the uterine mouth of the tube; the mucous membrane was dark red, finely injected. There was no rupture of the ovary; but an apoplectic cavity in its substance. This the author considers to be a case of tubal haemorrhage, partly emptying itself into the uterus.
4. Dr. McClintock relates an important case in which an inverted uterus was removed by linear ecrasement. The patient, aged twenty-two, mother of one child, very anaemic, was admitted into the Dublin Lying-in Hospital in Sep-

552

Chronicle of Medical Science.

[April,

tember, 1858. For twelve months she had suffered very profuse discharges of blood, always coming on at the menstrual periods, and lasting for fourteen or twenty-one days. A pediculated tumour, of pyriform shape, and of the size of a walnut, was found low in the vagina; the neck of this tumour was embraced, but not constricted, by the thin os uteri; it was quite insensible to ordinary manipulation; its surface was smooth, dark piuk, and discharged blood when scratched. The patient had been delivered after a protracted labour, by a rude country midwife, fourteen months before; the after-birth, she says, twice " slipped away" from the nurse, the cord being broken. The tumour being drawn down by a vulsellum, the os was entirely effaced, the vagina becoming quite continuous with the neck of the tumour. This led to the conclusion that the case was one of inverted uterus. Several attempts were made under chloroform to effect re-inversion, without success. On the 20th of October, a
silk ligature was passed round the neck of the uterus by Gooch's canula; this
caused much pain, and some vomiting. In the evening the ligature was tightened, and again on the next day. After forty-eight hours the ecraseur was applied below the ligature, the uterus having been drawn down by a vulsellum. The chain was worked very slowly, the uterus being severed in eight minutes. Pain attended the operation; and febrile excitement followed; opium was given, and turpentine epithems applied. In a fortnight the patient was allowed to get up. Six weeks afterwards, the os uteri presented almost the ordinary appearance; a catheter passed about one-third of an inch up the cervical canal. On the 27th of December, Dr. McClintock was informed that the patient was quite well, but had not menstruated.

II. Pregnancy.

On the Diagnosis of Pregnancy. By Professor Hecker. (Monatsschr. f. Geburtsk., Dec. 1858.)

Professor Hecker, of Marburg, has published the result of extensive investigations into the prognostic value of the penetrability to the finger of the os internum uteri in pregnancy. It is generally known that shortly before the
onset of labour the os uteri internum opens. Dr. Hecker has endeavoured to
give precision to the indications of this phenomenon. Since 1833, when he succeeded to the charge of the Marburg Lying-in Hospital, records have been kept of the date on which the os internum was ascertained to be open, and of the lapse from that event to labour. He of course points to the difficulty, that the time when the opening of the os internum was felt was not necessarily that when the os first opened; but he believes that the results of a large number of observations compensate for this source of error, although, since all the error is always on the same side, it is not easy to see how the multiplication of cases
can tend to its neutralization.

Dr. Hecker remarks that he has several times observed, in the case of women
who had walked a long distance to come to hospital, or who recently had undergone violent exertion, that the inner os uteri was penetrable on admission, but closed again after a few days rest.
His general results are as follows : Out of 2593 persons examined between 1833 and 1858, there were 946 in whom the inner os uteri was penetrable to the finger. Of these 916, 723 were pluriparaj and 223 primipara;. Of the 723 pluriparae,

366 were delivered within 7 days of ascertained penetrability.

510

?

? U

586

? 21

_638

?

? 28

85

.,

after 28

,,

1859.]

Quarterly Report on Midwifery.

553

Of the 223 primiparse,

138 were delivered within

169

?

189

?

209

?

14 went over

7 days.
14 ? 21 ? 28 ? 28 ?

primiparse, Thus it appears that in

penetrability of the inner os uteri was

followed by labour in seven days in G2 per cent, of the cases, and in pluriparae

in about 50 per cent.; that labour followed within fourteen days in 75 per

cent, of the primipara;, and in 70'5 per cent, of the pluriparse.

III. Labour.

1. Four Deliveries by Caesarian Section in extreme Contraction of the Pelvis. By Dr. G. Pagenstecher. (Monatssch. f. Geb., Aug. 1858.)
2. Cases of Caesarian Section, with Successful Result for Mother and Child. By T. J. Preericks and J. A. Groesbeck. (Nederl. Tijdschr, ii., Jan. 1858; and Schmidt's Jahrb., No. 8, 1858.)
3. On Perforation and Cephalotripsy. By Dr. Charles Hennig. (Monatsschr. f. Geburtsk., Jan. 1859.)
4. Ohstetrico-Medical History of a Woman in Ticelve Labours. By Dr. Perrin. (Gazette Medicale, Jan. 1859.)
5. A New Obstetric Forceps (called Leniceps). By Dr. A. Mattel (Gazette Medicale, Jan. 1859.)
6. On Inflammation of the Fallopian Tubes and Escape of the Purulent Secretion into the Cavity of the Abdomen, as a cause of Peritonitis in Puerperal Women. By Dr. A. Martin. (Monatsschr. f. Geburtsk., Jan. 1859.)

1. The four cases of Dr. Pagenstecher illustrate various conditions which are held in Germany to be motives for resort to the Cocsarian section.

Case I.?Rupture of the uterus during labour, in a pelvis contracted from

osteomalacia; escape of the child into the abdominal cavity; Caesarian section.

?On the 9th November, ] 857, Dr. Pagenstecher was calied to a woman, aged

twenty-eight. She had borne a first child three years before, and had been

unable to move for four months after. During this second gestation, she had suf-

fered from pains in the bones of the pelvis and hips, and during the last three

months had been unable to walk or lie down, being reduced to sitting on the

edge of the bed. During stormy and painful contractions, repeated vomiting set

in,"after which the child's head, which had been before felt, suddenly disappeared,

and all pains ceased. Dr. Pagenstecher found the patient an hour and a half

after the catastrophe much prostrated, cold at the extremities, cold sweat on

the forehead, pulse imperceptible. The belly, very tender, was hanging over

the symphysis; below the navel he felt a hard round lump, filling both sides

of the abdomen; above this, to the left of the navel, a foot was made out. The

pelvis presented a strong curvature of the lumbar vertebra; forwards, and to the

right a considerable curvature of the sacrum, it being compresscd from above

downwards. The conjugate diameter was

inches, the symphysis was

pointed to the right, and the rami of the pubes formed two nearly parallel

lines, running to the tubera ischia. The tubera were scarcely two fingers'-

breadth across. The os uteVi could not be reached. When the abdomen

was incised, the uterus was seen pale and contracted in the lower half of the

wound, the right shoulder-blade of the child in the upper. The child ex-

tracted, much thick dark blood flowed from the abdomen. The incised wound

yielded hardly any blood. There seems to have been no reaction. Death

554

Chronicle of Medical Science.

[April,

followed twenty-six hours after tlie operation. On dissection, numerous coagula were found in the peritoneal sac, but no peritoneal exudations. The uterus was tolerably thick and contracted at its fundus, and very distended and thin below. Its posterior wall was rent in an oblique direction, from the os uteri to the insertion of the right broad ligament. The fist could be passed through the wound, and onwards into the vagina through the open os uteri. The walls of the uterus at fundus were pale, but sound and thick; the lower parts, and especially around the rent, were discoloured, very soft and thin. i)r. Pagenstacher is unwilling to declare that the uterine walls were in a diseased state prior to the rupture. He thinks that possibly the long pressure of the uterus against the projecting point of thepubes, and the sharp ridge of the last lumbar vertebra, favoured the rupture.
Case II.?Caesarian section in contracted pelvis from osteomalacia.?A woman, aged forty, had borne eight children, the last four dead. Labours tedious, with forceps. Since the second pregnancy she has suffered from pains in the "bones, and can only walk with difficulty. Labour began on the 2nd of December, 1857. The external conjugate diameter measured six inches. The symphysis was strongly beak-shaped, and the pubic arch, down to the tubera, so squeezed up, that these were scarcely an inch apart. The pubic arch assumed the shape of a key-hole. The promontory was easily felt by the finger. The foetal heart was distinctly heard. The Caesarian section was performed under chloroform. The incision had to be extended upwards above the navel, on account of the rising of the bladder so high above the pelvis. The extraction of the child was rendered difficult by the extremely energetic contraction of the uterus. The placenta had to be detached from a strong adhesion to the anterior wall. This occasioned great hsemorrhape both during the operation and in the following hours, when contractile pains entirely ceased. The child lived. The after-treatment consisted in small draughts of cold water and cold compresses ; one-quarter grain doses of morphia every three hours. Pains
and distention of the abdomen continued for next four days, then a discharge of thick coagulated blood. At the end of the first week a normal lochial flow. The sutures were removed on the seventh and eighth days. At the end of the second week peritoneal symptoms appeared, with vomiting and constipation, and painful distention of the belly. Small doses of opium with castor-oil, and lavements, allayed these conditions, and in four weeks' time the patient was fully restored. The child lived.
Case III.?Ca;sarian section in contraction of pelvis from rachitis.? Primipara, aged thirty-seven; 8th March, 1858. The patient is scarcely three feet and a half high; her skull was very flat and low, with very angular parietal bones. Labour began last night; the water flowed about midnight; the child was alive. The conjugate diameter was estimated at two inches and a quarter ; the pelvic outlet very narrow. The head, with large caput succedaneum, presented. The patient was narcotized, and an incision carried from the navel to two fingers'-breadth above the pubes; this was afterwards extended above the navel. The peritoneum opened, the very fat and cedematous omentum lay behind the abdominal wall. This was pushed aside, and the uterus was opened. On account of the incomplete anaesthesia and the restlessness of the patient, the protrusion of some folds of intestine could not be prevented. The left shoulder presented first; the left arm, then the right, were freed, when the breech was brought forward, and the child delivered by the legs. It was very cyanotic; it breathed, however, after a slight loss of blood and cold aspersions. The placenta lay below and to the right; it was removed without difficulty. Free bleeding of the Uterus was stilled by ice. The wound was brought together, a small plug inserted at the lower angle, the belly properly supported, and an ice-bladder applied for twenty-four hours.

1859.]

Quarterly Report on Midivifery.

555

Internally, morphia and ice. The sutnres were removed on the sixth day; the entire wound healed by the first intention, with the exception of a small spot. The patient was quite well in the third week, suckling her child.
Case IV.?Casarian section in pelvic contraction from osteomalacia, performed for the second time on the same woman.?On the 28th March, 1858, a_ married woman, whom Dr. Pagenstecher had delivered by Caesarian section in 1852, came again under his care. In the first year the patient had suffered frequent relapses of osteomalacia, and was now in a state of marked marasmus. With extreme muscular atrophy, the abdomen had undergone an enormous development, reaching to the knees; and its walls, thin as paper, were necrosed in. several places. Tor months the patient could neither walk nor stand; the pelvic bones were in the highest degree painful, much thinned, and the diameter, as far as could be determined, considerably narrowed. Labour began with strong pains in the morning; at six p.m., when seen, the pains had ceased, and
with them the foetal movements. The foetal heart could not be heard. The incision was carried to the middle of the abdomen. The transparent
uterus was exposed and opened. It had, notwithstanding the extreme thinning of its walls, maintained the compression of the pains; the membranes protruded uninjured ; they were much thicker than the uterine walls. It was ascertained that the placenta was fully detached, so that the intra-uterine labour was completed. The removal of the dead child and placenta followed without trouble, and the uterus contracted into a hard fist-sized ball. The abdominal wound was united; the haemorrhage was very violent; morphia and ice-bladder were unable to allay it. The belly became distended, so that on the next day it had attained the same size as before delivery. Vomiting set in, and death followed eighty hours after the operation.

2. Case I.?A woman, aged twenty-nine, with short and crooked legs, had been delivered in her first pregnancy of a dead premature child; in her second pregnancy, of a child at full term by craniotomy; in her third pregnancy, of a dead child in the eighth month, also by art. Her fourth pregnancy seemed at an end on the 9th of July. The sacrum was much curved, the promontory easily reached. The conjugate diameter was two inches and a half. Caesarian section performed. The details are not related, but the patient is reported to have completely recovered.
Case II.?A primipara, aged twenty-one, was in labour. The promontory
projected greatly; the upper pelvic strait was narrowed to a fissure two
inches across. The abdominal incision was made a little to the side of the
linea alba, on account of the lateral position of the uterus. There was little loss of blood; the uterus contracted well. Slight unpleasant symptoms were removed by morphia. In the eighth week complete recovery.
In neither case is the fate of the child recorded.

3. Dr. Hennig has made an analysis of a number of cases of cephalotripsy, with the view of comparing the results of this operation with those of perforation. The cases are arranged in three series : 1st, Those in which the mother
recovered; 2ndlv, Those in which the mother's life was saved, but the structures injured ; 3rdly, Those in which the mother died. 64 cases are collected; of these 41 mothers recovered completely, 6 imperfectly, and 12 died. The result of the remainder is unknown. [The detailed examination of the cases is not decisive in favour of the operation. The collection, like most others of the kind, is worthless as an element of statistical comparison. Some of the opera-
tions were performed in hospitals, and the deaths might be, at least in part, ascribed to puerperal fever ; and other circumstances vary, especially the indications taken by different physicians to call for the operation. Thus one case

556

Chronicle of Medical Science.

[April,

is quoted from Dr. Crede in which this physician waited three hours in order to let the child die. It is quite clear that no trustworthy comparison can be made between the results of operations performed on the Continent and in hospitals, and of operations performed in this country.?Rep.]

4. The obstetrical history of a woman in twelve labours, related by Dr. Perrin, is of extreme interest, as showing two points?1st, The presumed increasing pelvic contraction; 2ndly, The application of turning to delivery as a substitute for craniotomy. The first seven labours passed without remarkable difficulty; the seventh, however, required the forceps. The children were all living, and some of them showed symptoms of rickets during infancy. In the remaining five labours none of the children survived. In the eighth labour the head remained at the brim without being able to enter, from projection of the sacral promontory. The forceps failed, and turning was performed; the head was at length disengaged by the forceps. The child's heart was beating, but it never breathed. In her ninth pregnancy, the proposition to induce labour at seven months was not carried out. The feet presented; extraction was effected; but the child, born asphyxiated, did not breathe. In the tenth labour the head was lying on the brim. Turning was effected, and the head was extracted by forceps. The child's heart pulsated, but it never breathed. In her eleventh labour, by version alone, without forceps, a still
child of average size was delivered. In the twelfth and last labour the head
lay again at the brim ; child was alive. Turning was quickly effected immediately after rupturing the membranes. The diminution of the antero-posterior diameter, caused by the projection of the promontory, arrested the entry of the head until after long and laborious efforts of two accoucheurs, who were successively tired out. The child was very large and still-born.
It is highly probable that in this country several of the latter children would have been delivered by craniotomy. It may be said that under the method pursued the children equally died; but it may be urged that a revolting operation was avoided, and that the children had a chance of life.

5. Dr. Mattei has introduced anew form of forceps, which, from its assumed gentle action, he calls the leniceps. The instrument consists of two similar
blades, having the single cranial curve, which nearly accurately fits the cra-
nium. The curve is therefore great. The blades do not lock, but fit iuto a
bar of wood having several notches to admit the stalks at various distances. The blades and stalks are very short. Amongst the advantages claimed are that its moderate size enables the accoucheur to use it without the knowledge of the patient; that the blades being more curved, the tissues of the mother are less liable to dragging; that the head cannot be exposed to compression;
that it does not require an assistant to help in the introduction. It may be observed that all these objects, except the first, which is not to be commended, are accomplished by properly-constructed forceps, which are moreover capable
of effecting what the leniceps cannot do?namely, the bringing a head through a narrow pelvic brim. In the latter case some amount of compression by' the forceps is necessary, and may be safely employed.

G. Dr. Martin relates five cases in support of the proposition that inflamma-

tion of the Fallopian tubes and discharge of the purulent secretion into the

abdominal cavity is a cause '

of

puerperal

peritonitis.

He refers to a passage

in Cruveilhier's Anatomic Pathologique,' in which that admirable pathologist

suggested this explanation of some cases of peritonitis. It is right to re-

produce this passage:

"The presence of pus in the Fallopian tube being an extremely frequent

phenomenon in peritonitis, I have asked myself if it were not possible that

1859.]

Quarterly Report on Midwifery.

557

peritonitis was in some cases the result of the passage of pus from the cavity of the tube into the cavity of the peritoneum; if capillary attraction or vital suction be exerted in the act of conception upon the spermatic fluid by the Fallopian tube, might not it be exerted as well upon the pus or any other liquid contained in the cavity of the uterus ?"
It is desirable to give briefly the cases of Dr. Martin, so as to expose the evidence upon which his proposition is based.
Case I.?A primipara, aged "twenty-two, delivered in the Jena Lying-in Hospital on the 8th April, 1839, after a natural labour, of a strong living child. She felt a " chill" a short time afterwards. Suddenly, on the 2nd May, pain set in in the left abdomen; on the 3rd May, this was more intense, and fever was added; on the 6th, diarrhoea and delirium ; on the 7th, death. The treatment consisted of twelve leeches applied on two occasions during the first days; castor-oil, opium, camphor, and ipecacuanha.
Autopsy.?A sero-pumlent effusion in the lower part of the abdominal cavity; the omentum was glued to the peritoneum in front by puriform gelatinous masses. The uterus and lower intestinal convolutions were also covered with purulent exudations. The uterus was of the size of a large fist; the left tube was considerably enlarged in its outer third, and filled with purulent mucus; the fimbria; were swollen. The right tube had also swollen fimbria, but its canal was not enlarged. The substance of the uterus was pale, normal, the inner surface reddened and covered with purple blood; there was a muco-purulent discharge at the placental seat. (It is not stated at what part of the uterus the placenta had been seated.)

Case II.?A primipara, aged thirty-three, was delivered in the Jena Lying-in Hospital on the 5tli November, 1853, of a living child, after a natural labour. On the evening of the Oth, there was tenderness in the right side of the abdomen, and fever; ten leechcs were applied. On the 7th, there was an offensive discharge. On the 9th, general symptoms worse; hurried breathing with bronchial secretion, diarrhoea, headache. On the 10th, death.
Autopsy.?The uterus rose above the promontory of the sacrum; its muscular structure was anaemic, containing no pus; its cavity, especially at the placental seat at the left angle, was covered with a grey-red pulpy mass, entangling shreds of vessels and plugs of blood; the cervical canal was filled with sanguinolent purulent fluid. At the abdominal extremity of both tubes was a purulent exudation, which was continued throughout the entire mucous membrane; the right tube was much enlarged, the mucous membrane loosened and partly covered with a yellow, purulent secretion; the right ovary was united to the posterior wall of the uterus and the rectum; the left tube was affected in a lesser degree.

- Case III.?A primipara, aged twenty-five, was delivered in the hospital on the 12th July, 1851, after a tedious labour, of_a living girl. In the night she felt suddenly severe pain in the abdomen, which increased; the belly became distended, hot, and acutely painful on moving; ten leeches applied; calomel and opium. Death early on the lltli.
Autopsy.?The abdominal cavity held a brownish flocculent pus. The lymphatic vessels of either side along the spermatic veins were much distended; the lymphatic glands enlarged ; the larger lymphatic vessels contained pus and small purulent foci. The uterus was strongly contracted; muscular substance pale; vessels empty ; the placental seat was on the anterior wall, two inches above the inner os uteri; the remaining part of the inner surface was uniformly reddened, without traces of exudation or suppuration. The tubes, especially the left, were much enlarged; the vessels of the fimbriae injectcd; the mucous membrane loosened, thick, and covered at the outer end with a creamy secre-

46-xxin.

'18

558

Chronicle of Medical Science.

[April,

tion. On the left ovary and t.nbe the veins -were distended, and the lymphatic
vessels 'were fdled with whitish fluid.
Case IV.?A primipara, aged twenty-five, was delivered in the Jena Hospital on the 19t.li November, 1857, of a living boy. In the afternoon of the following day, she had pain in the abdomen, and took ten grains of calomel, and on the 2J st, ten grains more. Several stools folio-wed the last dose. On the 22nd, the symptoms had remitted. On the 23rd, however, when seemingly quite well, she got out of bed, and being surprised, leaped suddenly back again. Shortly after this, shivering and acute pain in the abdomen came on. On the 24th, the pain was especially severe in the right side. Twelve leeches applied. On the 25th, the abdomen was distended; everything was worse; twelve more leechcs applied. Bronchitis, tympanitis appeared, and death
ensued on the 27th.
Autopsy.?A large quantity of bloody purulent exudation flowed from the abdomen when opened. The omentum, where glued to the right iliac fossa, was inflamed. The ovaries were covered with exudation; both tubes at their outer extremities much distended with purulent contents. The inner surfacc
of uterus showed remains of endometritis.
Case Y.?A primipara, aged twenty-nine, was delivered in the Jena Hospital of a living boy?labour natural?on the 26th May, 1858. She was quite well for the first week, excepting that the locliial discharge was profuse and offensive. On the 3rd June the abdomen was painful, and she had three stools. During the 4th and 5th, the diarrhoea continued ; she took an infusion of ipecacuanha with acetate of ammonia. On the 6th, the diarrhoea had ceased, and the patient got up to dress; while stooping for this purpose she was suddenly seized with an acute pain in the abdomen, which increased from hour to hour; the severest pain was in the right side. It was concluded that this sudden pain was caused by the escape of pus from the Fallopian tube, brought about by the sudden compression of the abdomen in stooping. Ten leeches applied. Tympanitis, delirium, and collapse followed, and death on the 10th.
Autopsy.?A considerable quantity of purulent exudation was found, espe-
cially in the right half of the abdomen, and the principal focus was seated in the right iliac fossa. There was pus in the cavity of the uterus, but no pus in the vessels or muscular wall. The right tube was much dilated, and contained a considerable collection of pus. The left tube was quite normal.
Dr. Martin insists upon the necessity of keeping women who exhibit any symptoms of metritis perfectly quiescent, so as to favour one of the terminations of tubal inflammation, which is closure of the fimbriated extremity. Professor Yirehow, in some observations upon this paper, said it was a very difficult matter to determine the starting-point of a peritonitis. Every inflammation of the abdomen, no matter how arising, had by the law of gravity a tendency to involve the pelvic organs. Thus in perforation of the stomach or processus vermiformis, inflammations of the tubes and ovaries occurred as much as in primitive disease of these organs. The clearing-up of this question did not rest with anatomy, but with clinical observation.
(The llcporter would remark that all the cases occurred in hospital, and that no history is given of the sanitary condition of the institution. If puerperal fever?especially that form arising from hospital air?be the consequence of a blood-poison, the theory here set forth of a fatal peritonitis caused by the accidental escape of a little pus from a localized inflammation of the Fallopian tube, does not appear sufficiently proved.)

