V

An Account of Scarlet Fever, as it occurred in George

Hcriot s Hospital, in the months ofOctober, November, and

December 1832, and January 1833. By William Wood?

r. II. S. E. and F. R. C. S. E.

During the prevalence of scarlet fever in this city, and its vicinity, towards the end of the year 1832, and beginning of the year 1833, I enjoyed an opportunity of seeing many cases of the disease in George Heriot's Hospital, one of our largest
charitable institutions for the maintenance and education ot
boys; and although I am well aware that I have nothing to communicate on the subject original in the way of remark, and nothing new to propose in practice, I shall lay before the Society a short account of the disease, believing that it will not be altogether uninteresting to the members to be in possession of ft history of the complaint as it occurred in a number of individuals of nearly the same age, under the same roof, and altogether in a similarity of circumstances.
I am the more disposed to undertake this duty, because I shall thereby enjoy an opportunity of bringing under the notice of the Society an excellent history of the same disease, as it occurred in the same hospital in the year 1804, published by my much esteemed friend Dr Hamilton Senior, Physician to the Institution, in the appendix to his invaluable work on Purga-
tive Medicines.
I may premise, that I have drawn up the history of the disease exclusively from the cases which occurred in the hospital during the late epidemic; and I have taken no notice of the
many varied modifications of it which have been observed at
other times and in other situations; nor have I made any allusion to the opinions or writings of medical men on the subject, it being my object to exhibit an accurate sketch of the disease, however rude, as it appeared in the hospital during the late epidemic, and to compare and to contrast that with the more finished picture of the same complaint, as it occurred in the same situation in the year 1804, drawn by Dr Hamilton.
George Heriot's Hospital, as is well known, stands in an open, airy situation; the rooms and wards are kept remarkably

Edinburgh Medico-Chirurgical Society.

33

clean, and well ventilated; the inmates are well fed and clothed, and are in general remarkably healthy. On the 23d October,
when the fever made its first appearance, the establishment con-
sisted of 179 boys, from 8 to 14 years of age; of 17 female, and 10 male adults, making in all a family of 206 persons; all at that time in good health, with the exception of several of the boys being affected with chronic scrofulous sores.
An attempt was made to ascertain how many of the boys had previously been affected with scarlet fever; but the information procured on this subject is vague and unsatisfactory. I may state, however, that of the 179 boys, 33 were said to have passed through the disease; 91 not to have had it; and in regard to the remaining 55, nothing was known.
44 of the boys became affected with the disease during the continuance of the epidemic; of whom 5 were supposed to have
had it previously; 26 not to have had it; and as to the remainnig 13, nothing could be ascertained.
Ot the 13o boys who escaped the complaint, 37 were said to have been previously affected with it; 67 not to have had it; and as to the other 41, nothing could be learnt.
The fever could not be traced into the Hospital; and it is rather remarkable that it appeared there while the inmates were under strict quarantine regulations, which had been enacted a
considerable time before for the exclusion of cholera. It is not

less remarkable, that, in another charitable institution in the near neighbourhood, containing nearly 100 young girls, in which similar quarantine regulations had been enforced, but had been removed some time before October, and the inmates had been
allowed to communicate as usual with their friends in the town,

scarlatina did not appear at all.
It ought, perhaps, to be mentioned here, that the son of one of the male servants of the Hospital, who, from the nature of his duty, is engaged during the greater part of the day with the boys, but who passes the night with his family in a small house immediately on the outside of the precincts of the Hospital, had been very tediously and dangerously ill of scarlet fever towards the end of August; the father, being in attendance on his son during his illness, was prevented from entering the grounds of the Hospital for nearly a month ; and the first case of the fever which occurred in the Hospital did not take place for above a
month from the time at which he was allowed to resume his

duties. Under these circumstances, it does not seem at all pro-

bable, though perhaps not impossible, that the disease was in-

troduced into the Hospital in this way.

_

From the time of its introduction into the institution, the

disease spread rapidly, notwithstanding precautionary measures

vol. xliii. no. 122.

c

34

Select Communications from the

having been immediately taken to prevent, if possible, its exten-
separated sion. The boys who complained were immediately
from their healthy companions, and were placed, as soon as the
disease was ascertained to exist, in one of two rooms
appropriated exclusively to the reception of patients labouring under scarlet
fever. From these sick rooms tliey were removed to one of the sleeping wards fitted up for convalescents, where they were kept for a long time, for the purpose of preventing their coming contact with the uninfected boys, and of hindering them from exposing themselves prematurely to cold air, which had in one case produced alarming illness.
At the end of one month from the first appearance of the
disease, 30 of the boys had been attacked with it; at the.end of the second month IS more; and in another month 3 additional
cases were added to the list, making in all 45 cases in three months. The two boys first affected were taken ill in the same sleeping ward, but afterwards the disease occurred indiscriminately in the five. The two first cases, and by far the larger proportion of the whole, came from the sleeping room appropriated to the use of the younger boys.
In order to show the rate at which the fever extended, I may mention, that 1 boy was taken ill on 23d October; 1 on 25th; 2 on 26th; 2 on 5th November; 2 on 7th; 2 on 9th; 1 o# 10th; 1 on lltli; 3 on 12th; 2 on 13th; 1 on 14th; 5 o? 15th; 1 on 16th; 1 on 17th; 1 on 18th; 1 on 19tli; 1
20th ; 2 on 22d ; 1 on 27th ; 1 on 28th ; 2 on 30th ; 1 on
December; 2 on 4th; 1 on 5th ; 1 on 6th; 1 on 9th; 1 10th ; 1 on 22d; 1 on 7th January; 1 on 8th; nurse on 20tbi in all, 45 cases.
In stating the number of cases of scarlet fever, I think it rigl'1 to mention, that twenty-nine of the forty-five patients were affected with both scarlet eruption and sore throat; and that sixted1 suffered from sore throat only, without any eruption having bed1 observed; these I considered as cases of scarlet fever, frotf1
the appearance of the throat and tongue, and from the naturc and extent of the fever. It being now, I believe, generally admitted, that, in families where scarlatina appears, some, even
the individuals who have not previously suffered from that disease, are occasionally affected with it in the form of sore thro^
only. That the complaint in the sixteen boys above alluded to
actually scarlatina, I consider proved by the fact, that none them became afterwards affected with fever and eruption, though
very freely exposed to the contagion in the sick rooms and con' valescent ward. During the prevalence of scarlatina in tl'c Hospital, many of the boys, independently of those here state'

Edinburgh Medico-Chirurgical Society.

to have been affected with that disease, suffered from sore throat and temporary fever. 1 think there is little reason to doubt, that, in some of these cases at least, the complaint was a modification of scarlatina. I have not reckoned any of them, how. ever, as cases of that disease, but I kept them separate from the scarlet fever patients, and as much as possible, consistently with the accommodation in the Hospital, from the healthy boys.
Of the twenty-nine patients who, in addition to sore throat, exhibited the scarlet eruption, two were said to have passed preMously through scarlet fever,?twenty-two not to have done so, ?and nothing was known with respect to the other five.
Ot the sixteen patients who were affected with sore throat without eruption, three were understood to have been affected previously with scarlet fever, four not to have been so,?and, with regard to the other nine, no information could be procured.
rlhe epidemic fortunately proved a mild one, and one only of the forty-five patients died. I have no hesitation, however, in attributing, at least in some degree, the mildness of the complaint and the smallness of the mortality, to the favourable circumstances under which the sick were placed. The moment a boy complained, he was put under the care of one of the ordi-
nary female attendants of the house; and, as soon as the disease was ascertained to exist, he was removed to one of the scarlet fever wards, which were under the charge of careful day and night nurses ; and Dr Hamilton Senior and myself, the medical attendants, had unlimited powers from the governors of ordering whatever was thought necessary for the comfort of the sick and
convalescent.

The disease generally commenced with headach, loss of appe-

tite, and sickness, attended in some of the cases with frequent

vomiting. These symptoms were very quickly followed by great

frequency of pulse and heat of skin. In most of the cases the

patients complained at the same time of pain in the throat and

difficulty in swallowing. Vomiting was much more frequently

met with in the commencement of the epidemic than afterwards,

when it became of rare occurrence. This I was disposed to at-

tribute to the early exhibition of purgative medicines, in conse-

quence of the boys, from becoming aware of the existence of the

complaint in the Hospital, reporting themselves to be sick at the

very commencement of the disease.

The intensity and duration of the primary fever varied much

in the different individuals. The pulse was in all of them very

quick, and the skin intensely hot; and these symptoms gene-

rally appeared almost from the commencement of the complaint.

Delirium and great restlessness were frequent concomitants ot

this stage of the disease.

>111

1

It was remarked, that, after the fever had subsided, the pulse

80

Sclecl Communications front the

occasionally fell considerably below the natural standard, and continued so for some time during the patient's convalescence*
In all the cases there was more or less affection of the throat)

although in some of them it was so slight and so little complain' ed of, that, but for frequent examination, its existence might have escaped detection. I am disposed to think, from my o^n experience, that the existence of true scarlatina without soWe affection of the throat is a very rare occurrence, and that, upon careful and frequent inspection, it will generally be found to he
more or less inflamed. In none of the cases was there any ex-

tensive sloughing of the throat; in several of them there was

?

?

?

A

foul ulceration ; in many the fauces and tonsils were affected

with aphtha?, exhibiting, when these were removed, superficial ulceration. The fauces were frequently covered with a tough) dirty-white mucus, giving an appearance which might be mis-
taken by a careless observer for extensive sloughing. The submaxillary glands were generally more or less enlarged.
The scarlet eruption, in those cases in which it appeared, varied in the different individuals in intensity of colour, in duration, and in the extent of surface which it covered ; and the de-

gree of desquamation of the skin, which almost always took place
to a greater or less extent, seemed connected with these circuit' stances. There was very frequently observed, previously to the appearance of the eruption, a considerable redness of the tunic<* conjunctiva, which came to be considered a pretty certain indication of its approach.
The tongue, in by far the greater number of cases, was moist? generally, in the early stages of the disease, white, with its papillae red and projecting; giving an appearance considered to be in some degree characteristic of scarlatina. In the later stage3 it was frequently preternaturally red and tender, and occasion' ally superficially ulcerated. In one case, in which the throat was much ulcerated and foul, the tongue was dark-red, parched and glossy, and the teeth covered with brown sordes. In the milder
cases there was little thirst. The mucous membrane of the nosc

was frequently observed to be inflamed. Of the forty-five patients none died, and only three were con'
sidered in any great danger, from the primary symptoms of the disease ; including under that term the affection of the throat) and the eruptive fever. Of those who were dangerously ill fr?nl these causes, one was James Souter, a boy of 12 years of ag?> who, during the first forty-eight hours of the complaint, was affected with very violent and frequently repeated convulsion fits* He had been attacked in a similar way during the eruptive stag" of measles, and when labouring under hooping-cough. Another was Mrs Souter, the mother of James Souter, a widow of 28 yeafS

Edinburgh Medico-Chirurgical Society.

37

of age, who, after having acted for about two months as sicknurse to about thirty of the patients, became herself affected with the disease, of which she was very alarmingly and tediously
ill. From the continuation of foul ulceration of the throat, and
from the duration of the accompanying fever, which partook
very much of the typhoid character, there was much reason to tear that she would have died of exhaustion. 1 he third case was George Watson, aged "12, who was also considered in great danger from the same causes which excited our apprehension in the last patient.
The treatment of the disease in its primary form was extremely simple. In some of the earlier cases emetics of ipecacuan were administered at the commencement of the complaint; but in the later cases purgative medicines were used in preference, and repeated almost daily till the fever had subsided, when they were continued at intervals, more or less short, till the patient was considered perfectly cured.
The purgatives employed were compound powder of jalap, Epsom salts, compound colocynth pills, infusion of senna, jalap and calomel, supertartrate of potass, &c. varied according to circumstances. The patients were kept in a room moderately cool, and well-ventilated; and great attention was paid to cleanliness. During the eruptive fever, when the heat of skin was considerably above the natural standard, the surface of the body was frequently sponged, sometimes with cold, but more frequently with tepid water; and this practice was continued till the skin became of a more natural temperature, and had begun to desquamate, in those cases in which the eruption had appeared. Great relief was derived from this practice, which was extremely agreeable to the patients. They were kept on low diet, being allow-
ed only panado, gruel, or weak tea and bread, except in the cases, which were few in number, where the fever assumed much of the typhoid type, in which wine was cautiously given.
During the period of convalescence, the diet consisted of beeftea, light pudding, or fresh broth. In a few cases, where the strength was much diminished, a little wine was thought necessary. There were only eight cases, however, in all, in which wine was employed. The warm bath was frequently used, and apparently with much advantage, in diminishing the feverish excitement, and in bringing down the pulse during the desquamation
of the skin. At this stage of the disease, with the view of pre-
venting, if possible, the dropsical symptoms, a tea-spoonful of the supertartrate of potass was given twice or thrice a-day to almost all the patients, along with occasional purgatives* In one
or two of the eases, after the fever had subsided, moderate doses

38

Select Communications from the

produced of laudanum were found useful in allaying irritation,
by the state of the skin, and in procuring sleep.
In a few cases, where the throat was much swelled and in-
flamed, leeches were applied; but more generally this affection was treated by the use of a stimulating gargle, consisting of mfusion of roses, containing a proportion of muriatic acid, and tincture of capsicum. Where there was great tenderness of the throat, this gargle was found occasionally too stimulating, and hot milk and water were employed in its stead.
The principal danger of the disease was occasioned by th& secondary affections, including under that head dropsical effusions, swelling and suppuration of the glands behind the ear, and suppuration in the ear. During the period of con* valescence, nine of the forty-five patients became affected with dropsical swelling. In three of them, in the form of slight oedema below the under eyelids ; in four the oedema affected the face as well as the eyelids; in two it was more extensive, affecting in one of them also the hands; and in the other, in who# the disease proved fatal, the face, hands and arms, feet and legs? and, as was proved by dissection, effusion of serum had taken place into the cavities of the head and abdomen. The average period at which the dropsical symptoms appeared from the com' mencement of the fever was nineteen days,?the earliest being sixteen, and the latest twenty-three.
In consequence of the first patient who was affected with scarlet fever having fallen a victim to the dropsical affection* the nurses were very watchful, and generally pointed out the first appearance of oedema, which usually showed itself belo^ one or both of the under eyelids. Jalap, or neutral salts, with calomel, were immediately administered, and the warm bath was employed. Whenever symptoms occurred indicative of any in-
general ternal affection, particularly when attended with fever,
or local blood-letting, according to circumstances, was had recourse to; and these were immediately followed by the employ-
repeated ment of tartrate of antimony in small but frequently
doses,?a medicine which proved essentially useful in many of
the cases. The supertartrate of potass, and in one or two cases the tincture of digitalis, were prescribed as diuretics, but along
with purgative medicines. The patients who became affected with dropsical symptoms
were not those who had been most severely ill of the primary
fever.
In five of the nine boys who suffered from secondary affeC' tions, one or more of the glands behind the ear became swelled and inflamed. In one the swelling acquired a very large size, gave much pain, and when opened, there were discharged from

Edinburgh Medico-Chlrurgical Society.

39

)t several ounces of well-formed purulent matter; in the others the swellings were discussed. In these affections leeches were employed, and cold solutions in the first stacre, and warm fomena ions and poultices in the second. Two or three of the boys su eret rom suppuration in the ear ; but only in one of them
llr?ve a tedious or troublesome affection.

'\,Mln1sCCi?.v tin-, ? ^1 fu(ll o*.weu

-C Pat'ents) who liad been affected both with sore 1 lstmct scarlet eruption, had a renewed attack of fever, y" sore thro'a**t* and wnvi osvc_aarilue;tt UeiruUpJtUiIoUUn,, U dUuirilnugg tmhueiiir ^cuoinivvaa--

t.( .liT orl C11C?' ^

s sec?ndary illness so much resembled well-mark-

til

lltlna> that, had I not seen the patients under the first at-

UK, I ukl not have hesitated for a moment in declaring: that

t ie\ laboured under that disease in a distinct and decided form.

le secondary eruption was of shorter duration than the pri-

nidi}, and was not followed by desquamation of the skin. The

s a e or the throat was exactly the same as in the first attack.

ne or the patients thus affected was Daniel Mathieson, aged lie was originally taken ill on the Ttli November, and was considered euved on the 2d December; having had the fever in a. very distinct, and in ratlier a severe form ; the throat had been much inflamed and ulcerated; tlie eruption had been very vivid, and there had been much desquamation of the skin. On the night of tlie 4tli December he slept ill, owing to pain in a slightly enlarged gland behind the right car. On the 5th ic was hot and uneasy, and his pulse quick; he vomited after naving taken a close of sulphate of magnesia with calomel. In tile evening a copious scarlet eruption appeared over the body and limbs, apparently irf the same character with the rash in
scarlet tever; and the throat became inflamed and painful, the
inflammation being of a dark-red colour. On the Gth the rash was nearly gone; the skin was more cool; the pulse 84 ; took a dose of salts ; on the Ttli, the rash was quite gone, the throat was still much inflamed, and tlie tonsils swelled; the face was
flushed, and the pulse 100. These symptoms gradually went
0l'? and on the 19th, he was again convalescent. * It remains a matter of farther inquiry, how far certain per-
*?ns who have been affected with scarlatina in its most perfect

j There is a case recorded by Mr G. Hamilton in the 114th Number of the Edin-

i 1 Medical and Surgical Journal, in which scarlet fever seems to have taken

ace or a second time, during the existence of secondary affections of the disease,

?-uus>equence ot strong exposure to contagion. He says, " a girl (Watt) in Arthur

*ct' %was seize^ with the tever. The eruption came out well, and continued out

a out the usual time; but when she was getting better, a febrile state anil symptoms

i

began appear. While this girl laboured under the dropsy, ?i brother,

keen living at some miles distance, was brought home also affected with the

primary fever. They both slept in the same bed, and about three weeks after the

eruption had disappeared from the girl, she had a distinct aggravation of febrile

1 wins, witn a second well-marked eruption.1'

40

Select Communications from the

form, may remain subject to a recurrence of the disease, even after a short interval of time, in the event of their being freely exposed to the contagion. In the three cases which occurred in the hospital, the secondary eruption, fever, and affection of the throat appeared when the boys were surrounded by numerous companions labouring under scarlatina.
Two of the boys when ill of secondary symptoms of the disease were attacked with erysipelas in the face and head,?a complaint extremely prevalent at that time in the town and its vicinity, as well as in the hospital; and one of them had no less than four attacks of erysipelas in the course of his convalescence from the fever, in all of which it was seated in the face and
head.
Having now concluded this very long, and, I fear, very tedious history of scarlet fever as it occurred in George Heriots Hospital, I shall intrude on the time of the society for only a very short time, for the purpose of bringing under notice the very able and interesting account of a similar epidemic which appeared in the same hospital in the year 1804. It is published by Dr Hamilton Senior, under whose care the patients were. There is a very great similarity in the two epidemics. The first case of the disease appeared in the end of September 1804, and it continued to prevail for three months. There were at that time 120 boys, and 20 adults in the institution. Upwards of 50 of the boys took the fever, which was mild and little dangerous in the primary stages; but it proved fatal in three of
the patients from the secondary affections. " In all the children, particularly in those who were first af-
fected, the symptoms were so mild, that, but for my knowledge of the prevalence of the epidemic in town, I might have mis-
taken the disease on its first appearance, and been lulled into a
blameable security. The throat was not much affected; the uvula and amygdalae were slightly swelled and inflamed in every instance ; in a few cases, superficial suppuration and sloughing appeared. The efflorescence on the surface was partial, and in general transitory, leaving a peculiar paleness of countenance. The eye was dull and heavy. Sickness and prostration of appetite continued throughout the disease. The thirst was moderate ; great debility prevailed in every case; and in some & peculiar dejection and despondency, hardly to be looked for i? subjects so young. The pulse was variable ; always quick, till towards the end of the disease, when it sometimes sunk belo^ the natural standard; it was never full. The surface of the body was occasionally of a pungent heat. Obstinate constipation prevailed in general.
" My patients were objects of serious attention for twelve or

Edinburgh Medico-Chirurgical Society.

41

fourteen days ; the convalescent state of almost all of them was protracted for nearly the same length of time ; and six weeks elapsed before some who entered the sick room left it.
" ,^u.c^ was the appearance, and such is the history of this epidemic in Ileriofs Hospital; in conducting the care of which,
I employed purgative medicines fully ; while food suited to the weak appetite and feeble powers of digestion was directed.
I lie effect of the purgatives was favourable. The feces were hard, generally of a black, or greenish colour, and fetid; and sometimes of the colour and consistence of clay, and less fetid. In proportion to the evacuation of these feces, relief was perceptible. Returning appetite and vivacity accompanied the decline
and cessation of the various symptoms.
" As the weather had bccome cold, and otherwise inclement, the children were detained in the sick-room for many days after they were perfectly well; purgatives were administered, as the state of the bowels demanded ; and the general warm bath was repeatedly used, on the supposition that, by its restoring a perspirable state of the skin, it would, in concert with the purgative medicines, tend to prevent dropsical swelling, which, from the symptoms, I greatly dreaded.
" At last, healthy, and robust, and impatient of farther restraint, the convalescents were permitted to return to their particular wards, and, in no long time, to mix with their companions in school and at play.
" Happy I am that I had been thus careful and provident in using these precautions; for I have to relate the fate of three boys, who, in two or three weeks from their passing from under my care, were again reported as unwell, and again appear-
ed in the sick-room. Their symptoms and their fate were the
same. They had a leucophlegmatic look, incipient anasarca, total prostration of appetite, scanty, if not suspended secretion of urine, swelling of abdomen, obstinate constipation, nausea, extreme debility, and feeble pulse.
" Alarmed by these symptoms, I requested Messrs Alexander and George Wood, surgeons to the hospital, to join me in consultation. Suitable cordials were ordered, and purgative medicines of appropriate quality, and in repeated doses, were directed. The disease, in all the three, proceeded with a rapidity which afforded little farther opportunity for deliberation or ac-
tion. The stomach gave way ; all food, cordials, and medicines, were rejected, by vomiting. The watery effusion rapidly filled the cellular membrane, and inundated every cavity.
Within less than thirty-six hours from the recurrence of the ailment, the boys died, labouring under symptoms denoting ascites, hydrothorax, and hydrocephalus.

4>

Select Communications from the

" This termination was altogether new; I had never seen dropsy from scarlatina fatal. In consequence of this event, I approached the hospital for many days under deep anxiety, be-
cause I was conscious that other children were at the time in a
situation which might lead to the same unfortunate issue.1' * As some of the cases which occurred in Heriot's Hospital
during the late epidemic appear to me to be interesting, from the nature and severity of the secondary affections, which proved fatal in one instance, I consider it almost unnecessary to apologize to the society for bringing under their notice these cases in detail, and for giving an account of the appearances found on dissection in the body of the boy who died.
Archibald Bain, act. 10, was attacked with scarlatina on the 23d October, and had both eruption and sore throat. The fever did not run very high, but was of long duration, and materially diminished his strength. On 9th November, when convalescent, though still confined to bed, oedema appeared in his face, and soon extended to his hands and feet, attended by violent pain in the back part of the head. These symptoms were somewhat
alleviated by the treatment employed; but they soon returned in an aggravated form, and on the 20th November he was attacked with violent convulsion fits, frequently repeated, attended with excruciating pain in the head. At one time lie was deprived of his eyesight, which, however, returned, and lie remained sensible at intervals, till within a few hours of his death, which took place on the 23d November.
During the existence of the dropsical symptoms, the urine was found to contain albumen, and was of less specific gravity
than usual.
When the unfavourable symptoms appeared, from being languid and feeble, it was not deemed prudent to employ general blood-letting. A number of leeches were repeatedly applied to the temples and forehead, and blisters to the head. The bowels were powerfully acted upon by calomel and saline purgatives; and diuretics, particularly tincture of digitalis, were administered.
Dissection.?Before opening the body, it was remarked, that the oedema had very much subsided. After sawing through the skull-cap, the dura mater was found to adhere very firmly to it. A great deal of venous engorgement appeared on the brain, and the sinuses were full of coagulated blood. Considerable effusion had taken place between the arachnoid membrane and the pia mater, the former being preternaturally thick. The jmncta rubra were not more numerous than usual, and the substance of the upper part of the brain was quite natural. One or two ounces of serous fluid were found in the ventricles, with ramollissement of the fornix, nates and testes. The choroid

* Appendix to Dr Hamilton's work on Purgative Medicines, p. 50, &c.

Edinburgh Medico-Chirurgical Society.

43

plexus was not so vascular as in the healthy state. The corpus callosum, thalami, and corpora striata, were quite natural in
structure and appearance.
A small quantity of serous fluid was found in the abdomen. The intestines, kidneys, &c. seemed to be quite sound.
It was ascertained that several children of the family had died of hydrocephalus.
David Gray, aged 9, was attacked with scarlatina on the 7th of January, and was affected with a considerable degree of sore throat, and with scarlet eruption. The disease, on the whole,
was rather severe. On the 25th, when convalescent, but still confined to bed, slight oedema appeared of the left upper eyelid. On the 27th, both the eyelids were oedematous ; all the functions, however, were natural. For several days he had taken calomel and other purgative medicines. In the evening
of this day, he complained of severe pain in the head, and the oedema of the face had considerably extended. He took a dose of the infusion of senna, which produced both purging and vomiting. On the 28th, he had slept well; the headach was quite gone ; the tongue was clean, skin cool, and pulse 70. The infusion of senna was ordered to be repeated, which produced the same effects as formerly.
29th. 9 a. ax. Had complained much of pain in the forehead during the preceding afternoon. The oedema of the face was somewhat increased ; the pulse below the natural standard. At 10 i\ m., he became insensible, and was seized with strong convulsions. He was put into a warm bath ; a large blister was applied between the shoulders, and sinapisms to the feet; a stimulating injection was given, which operated freely. Since 3 A. M., he has been sensible, complaining occasionally of pain in the fore and back part of the head; the oedematous swelling of the face is considerably diminished; tongue clean ; pulse 72, and irregular. Ten leeches were applied to the temples and forehead, and a dose of calomel and sulphate of magnesia ordered. 4 p. m. Has vomited frequently, in consequence of which the calomel and salts were not given, but he had a purgative injection. The leeches have bled very freely. He has had since morning many attacks of convulsions. He is at present insensible, and the muscles of the right eye and mouth, and side of the face, are in constant convulsive action. The pupils of both eyes are dilated, and insensible to the light of a candle; the pulse is quick, irregular, and feeble ; he has been occasionally sensible to-day between the fits. 8 p. m. Convulsions went off soon after four o'clock, and have not returned ; he is quite sensible, but seems to have a difficulty in speaking; the eyes are of a more natural appearance, and the pupils contract on

44)

Select Communications from the

the approach of a candle. Pulse is not so quick, and is more regular. Cold to be applied to the forehead and temples. 30th. The convulsions have not returned; he slept well, and was quite sensible during the night, and he complained only of occasional pain in the head. To-day he is free from headach or any other uneasiness ; pulse 72, soft and regular ; he. now speaks easily. 31st. Slept well, and has continued free from all pain. From this time he continued to improve, till the 6th, when there was slight oedema of the right side of the face, which was removed by purgative medicines, and from that period lie
continued to convalesce.
William Lapsley,aged 11, was taken ill on the 9th November, and was affected with both sore throat and eruption, attended with a pretty smart degree of fever. On the 25th, when convalescent, he complained of pain in one of the glands behind the left ear, and of severe pain in the back of the head. The face was observed to be slightly cedematous. He was ordered to be bled, but only two ounces of blood were procured; and calomel and saline purgatives were administered. On the 26th, the swelling of the gland was rather increased in size, but was not inflamed externally ; he complained much of pain in it, stretching up to the top of the head. Ten leeches were applied to the neck, which bled freely. In the evening, his head was more painful, his breathing was hurried and oppressed, and the
oedema of the face increased. Six ounces of blood were taken
from the arm, which was somewhat buff'y. The purgatives were repeated, and acted freely. He slept ill during the night, complaining much of pain in the left side of the head. On the 27th, pain o? the head was somewhat lessened, oedema of the face had nearly disappeared, and the breathing was much relieved. Pulse was 84, and soft; a warm bath was administered, after being removed from which, a copious perspiration broke out, and he seemed much better. At night, the swelling behind the ear was enlarged in size, and more painful. The pain in his head, and the oedema of the face, were much increased, and the breathing was hurried and oppressed; a dose of calomel was given, and one-sixth of a grain of tartrate of antimony, dissolved in
water, ordered to be administered every two hours.
28th. The calomel operated freely ; he vomited several times after taking four doses of the antimony. Pain in his head and neck, he said, was almost entirely gone, and the breathing relieved. Pulse was 84. He was ordered to take one-eighth of a grain of tartrate of antimony every hour, and to have the warm bath. After the bath, he seemed lively and well. Towards night he complained much more of his head; oedema of the face was increased ; and was very restless; moaned and screamed out dur-

Edinburgh Medko-Chirurgical Society.

45

ing his sleep. Twelve leeches were applied to the temples, which bled freely, and the antimony was continued. On the 29th, his face was less swelled, and the lieadach quite relieved. He had passed a better night, and was in a state of nausea from the antimonial medicine ; pulse 80, and soft. The solution was
ordered to be continued, and half a drachm of supertartrate of potass to be given. In the evening, pain of the head had returned, and twelve leeches were applied to the left temple, which
bled freely. He was ordered to take one-eighth of a grain of tartrate of antimony every quarter of an hour.
30th. Complained during the night of pain in the right side of his head, and his sleep was much disturbed. He remained in a state of nausea for five or six hours, when the medicine was intermitted. To-day he looked more lively, and says the lieadach is gone ; pulse 100, and soft; bowels very open. Towards afternoon, complained again of pain on the right side of the head. The tartrate of antimony was ordered to be given, by which he was kept in a state of nausea for some hours. He had some quiet sleep, and perspired freely. The eyes, which were occasionally dull, appeared more lively, and the iris, which had been sluggish in its action, contracted more readily on the approach of a candle.
1st December. The headach was gone; pulse 82, and soft. He was in a state of nausea during the night, and slept more quietly. Swelling behind the ear was much diminished in size, and gave no pain. Continued well till the 4th, when he began to complain of pain in the left side of his head ; pulse was 96. The antimony was ordered to be given every quarter
of an hour.
5th. He became sick and vomited after a few doses of the
antimony, and since that time has been free from pain in his head. Slept well; pulse 82 ; seems lively, and makes no complaint. Was ordered to take a dose of cream of tartar thrice a-day.
From this time he continued to improve daily, and, on the 14th January, he left the sick-room perfectly well.
Alexander Bain, aged 12, brother of the boy who died, was taken ill on the 14th November, and became affected both with sore throat and eruption. On the 4th December he was re-
moved to the convalescent ward.
Having incautiously exposed himself to cold on the forenoon of the 6th, he was taken ill at night with fever, and severe pain in his legs and thighs, in consequence of which he was brought back to the sick-room, and placed among the patients labouring
under scarlet fever.
7th Decembei*. 9 a.m. Face is a good deal (edematous; passed a restless night; is in a state of perspiration. A dose of calomel

46

Select Communications from the

was ordered. 4 p. m. He has complained since morning of severe pain in the breast; the oedema of the face is increased ; pulse 84; the calomel has not operated. Eight ounces of blood
were ordered to be taken from the arm, and a dose of salts was
prescribed. 8 v. m. The blood, of which fully nine ounces were taken, flowed freely; it is cupped, and exhibits some appearance of size. There is a scarlet eruption on the face and upper part of the breast; pain of breast is quite gone; the oedema of the face is rather diminished. Salts operated well; pulse 92; skin hot. One-eighth of a grain of tartrate of antimony was ordered to be given every quarter of an hour. 8th December. Vomited after taking four doses of the antimony, when it was intermitted. A dose of saltswas ordered to be given this morning, which operated well. He coughed frequently during the night. An additional quantity of scarlet eruption appeared late last night on the upper part of the breast and face, which to-day is nearly gone ; the oedema of the face is much diminished ; skin is less hot; pulse 84; tongue clean ; is free from pain. From this date he continued to improve, and was reckoned again convalescent on the 19th December. The urine passed during the existence of the cedematous symptoms was not coagulable by heat.
On the 29th December, while still confined to the sick-room, he complained again of severe headach, and pain on both sides
of the neck behind the ears, in consequence of which he took
five doses of the tartrate of antimony, at intervals of a quarter of an hour, which produced vomiting and free general perspiration. 30th. The headach abated last night, and he slept well. To-day, complains of much pain on both sides of the neck, and of pain and difficulty in swallowing. The throat is inflamed; the facc flushed; and skin very hot; pulse 118. There is upon the breast and other parts of the body a blush of red, very much resembling the eruption of scarlatina. The solution of tartrate of antimony was ordered to be given. 31st. Took six doses of the antimonial mixture, after which he became sick and vomited, and after the interval of an hour it was again exhibited. He took eight doses, which produced sickness but no vomiting. Betwixt 7 and 8 p. m. he complained of very violent pain in the forehead, in consequence of which, seven ounces of blood were taken from the arm, when sickness and vomiting came on. The blood was very buffy; slept well; and on awaking in the morning, said the pain in his head and neck was completely gone. The eruption continued visible for some hours after the visit of yesterday, but disappeared in the evening. At present he makes no complaint. The inflammation of the throat is less ; skin cool and soft; tongue clcan and moist; bowels open ; pulse

Edinburgh Medico-ChirurgicaI Society.

47

80. 1st January. About 2 p. m. yesterday, complained again of severe pain in the forehead ; was hot and restless. He took eight doses of the antimonial solution. At 7 p. m. he became sick and vomited, and perspired freely, after which the pain in the head was very much diminished. He slept quietly during the night. To-day he is entirely free from pain.
2d January. At 2 p. m. yesterday, complained of some pain in the right side of his neck; skin was very hot; pulse 120. At 10 p. m. complained greatly of pain in his throat; the tonsils and fauces were much swelled and inflamed, and of a darkred colour. Took two compound colocynth pills, and used the stimulating gargle. 3d January. The bowels were moved freely during yesterday. He still complains to-day of much pain in the throat, but the swelling and inflammation are less; tongue is foul; skin hot; pulse 120. To have a dose of Epsom salts. 4th. Salts operated well; passed a quiet night; has much less pain in swallowing, and the inflammation of the fauces and tonsils is greatly diminished. There is some inflammation of the mucous membrane of the nostrils; tongue cleaner; skin cool; pulse 100. Two aloetic pills to be given at bed-time. 5th January. Pills operated ; is in all respects much better; pulse 80. From this time he continued to improve rapidly, and on the 14th left the sick-room quite well.
The two boys Bain belonged to a very large family, of whom
two had died of water in the head.
George Wright, aged 11, was seized with scarlet fever on the 15th November, and was affected with both sore throat and eruption. The eruptive fever was rather severe. On the 2d December slight oedema of the face appeared, and continued more or less for some days, without any other unpleasant symptom. Purgative medicines and supertartrate of potass were administered. On the morning of the 8th December he was free from complaint, but at night he complained of pain in his throat, soon followed by headach and heat of skin. On the 9th, at 10 a. m. he was very uneasy, complaining much of headach; his breathing was quick and oppressed ; pulse 120 ; the heart beating very strongly; his face was flushed and slightly swelled; the skin was hot, and on the breast and body covered with a scarlet eruption; one of the glands behind the right ear was swelled and painful. Ten ounces of blood were taken from the arm, and a dose of calomel and sulphate of magnesia were prescribed. 3 p. at. The blood flowed freely, and in a full stream ; it is cupped and sizy ; he has perspired copiously, and he seems very much relieved; pulse is less frequent, and is soft; purgative medicines have not yet operated. Was ordered a dose of Epsom salts. 9 p. m. The salts were rejected by vomiting,

48

Select Communications from the

but his bowels have been moved; pulse 100 ; skin cool; eruption has disappeared; tongue dry and foul. Was ordered to take the solution of tartrate of antimony during the night if he became more uneasy. 10th, 10 a. m. Took the solution twice, in consequence of having complained of pain in his head; he became sick, and the pain abated, after which he slept well; complains of pain in a small swelling behind the right ear, but says he feels generally better; the nose and upper lip are much swelled, and covered with erysipelatous inflammation; skin soft; tongue loaded; pulse 120 and full. Two compound colocynth pills were administered, to be followed at the distance of three hours by a dose of Epsom salts. 8 p. m. The erysipelatous inflammation has extended over part of each cheek; makes no complaint; skin moist; pulse 96. 11th, 10 a. m. Purgative medicines operated well; there is much uneasiness in the throat in swallowing, but it cannot be examined in consequence of the swelling of the lip ; skin hot; pulse 120. One-eighth of a grain of tartrate of antimony was ordered to be given every half-hour. 8 p.m. Seven doses of the antimony were retained, the eighth was vomjted. There is a copious perspiration all over the surface of the body; pulse 80 and soft; small vesicles have appeared on the face. 12th. Passed a good night; complains of pain in his throat and behind the left ear. The erysipelatous inflammation has disappeared from the right cheek, but is extending on the left, where it is of a darker red, and several vesicles have formed upon it; pulse 100 and soft; bowels very open. 13th. Complains principally of pain behind the left ear; inflammation of the left cheek has extended upwards to the scalp; skin hot; breathing quick; pulse 125; bowels open. A dose of the an-
timonial solution to be given every half-hour. 14tli. After taking seven doses of the mixture he vomited, after which he was much relieved ; the skin became cooler; the pulse less quick ; he passed a good night, but at eight this morning complained of severe pain in the upper part of his head. Two doses of the antimonial solution were given with relief. The erysipelas has extended over a considerable portion of the scalp; there is much inflammation and swelling of the left eyelids; vesicles on the cheek have discharged; pulse 120; bowels open. Antimonial mixture to be repeated. 15th. Complains principally of extreme tenderness of the scalp to touch; the inflammation of the left cheek and temple has much abated; pulse 120; bowels open. 16th. Skin having become hot and dry, took two doses of the antimonial solution. Two compound colocynth pills were given last night, which have operated. Inflammation of head and face much abated. 17th. Skin cool; tongue moist; pulse 106; inflammation abating. Soon after this date the erysipelas disap-

Edinburgh Medico-C/iirurgical Society.

49

peaved. He continued, however, to recover slowly till the end of January, having in the interval complained much of pain in both ears, but without any discharge. In the beginning of February he was sent to his own ward and to school.
On the 15th of that month he returned to the sick-room, in consequence of an attack of erysipelas in the left cheek, attended with fever and much headach. Leeches were applied to the temples; purgative medicines were given, with the occasional use of the antimonial solution, from this date to the 20th, when the erysipelas disappeared, leaving, however, frequent attacks of severe pain in the head, which were treated by the frequent application of leeches, by blistering, &c. &c. On the 25th the upper lip was much swollen, and erysipelas appeared on both cheeks, which continued for some days, attended with fever, much pain in the head, and occasional delirium.

March 11th. Since last report has continued to complain oc-

casionally of much pain in his head and breast, with almost con-

stant throbbing pain in one or both ears, but, on the whole, has

been gradually improving.

March 28th. Has continued much of an invalid, though oc-

casionally out of bed, and has almost constantly complained of

more or less pain in both ears, from which there has been dis-

charged to-day a quantity of purulent matter. He had a slight

threatening of erysipelas on the 24th.

April IGtli. Has continued to convalesce slowly, complaining

occasionally of pain in the head and ear, in consequence of which

complaints he is still confined to the sick-room.

From this time he continued to improve in health, and made

a complete recovery.

'

