Julian JP 4 dip I
NOVEMBER 1892.

THE SEWERS OF CALCUTTA.

We have carefully studied Mr. Baldwin

Latham's report on the Drainage of Calcutta,

together with Mr. Kimber's notes thereon.

Mr. Latham's reply and Mr. Kimber's rejoinder, which form a bulky and somewhat intricate

account of the present condition of the sewerage of Calcutta, and of the measures which have

been proposed to remedy its defects and to extend

its benefits to the " added area

The existing

sewers were intended to carry off not only the

sewage proper, but also the rainfall, street wash-

ings, and the sub-soil water, as well as the water

used for flushing and the tidal water. They are, therefore, of enormously larger size than is re-

quired for the removal of the sewage alone, and

it is an inherent defect in their original construc-

tion that the flow of their contents is influenced

twice a day by the state of the tides. The general trend of these sewers is from the

Hooghly eastwards to the Salt Lakes, and it un-

fortunately happens that high tide in the Salt Lakes is some two or three hours later than high
tide in the Hooghly. The result of this is that the flush water, entering the sewers during high
tide in the Hooghly and taking from one-and-ahalf to three hours to traverse the length of the
sewers, meets with high tide at the outfall towards

the Salt Lakes, and the consequence is stagnation in the sewers in the place of flushing; aud as stagnation means deposit, the result is that the
sewers are not self-cleansing, but have to be en-

tered by a troop of boys, and their deposited contents, chiefly road detritus, removed by hand.
Not only is this the case, but when heavy rainfall coincides, as ifc often does with high tides, the

sewers being occupied with sewage and tidal
water, the rain-fall is unable to enter the sewers,

floods the low-lying parts of the town to the depth of several feet, and even, it is stated,re verse currents take place, and the sewage mixed with the
water flows up the sewers and into the sub-soil.
It also appears that the pumping power re*quired to empty the sewers is only competent to deal with dry weather sewage, but not with the
addition of rain or flush water, so that when
either rain water or flush water is present in the
sewers, the pumping is stopped and the penstock is opened and the flow through the sewers is then dependent on the level of the water in the tidal
Salt Lakes. Another inherent defect in the
present sewers is, that the crown of the outfall
sewer is higher at the pumping station than the surface of some parts of the town at some distance from the outfall works ; and as the drainage of the city is to be effected through the outfall sewer, it happens when this sewer is full that the lower parts of the city become a reservoir for storing rain and mixed sewage, which cannot escape until the sewers have been relieved by the comparatively slow flow from them. There
is,moreover, a constant leakage going on between
the sewers aud the sub-soil. Sewers which were
intended to carry away the sub-soil water must
necessarily be porous, aud the Calcutta sewers are so porous that the leakage into t he sewers, which is constantly going on, varies, at different seasons of the year, from two to fifteen millions
of gallons in twenty-four hours, according to the tides. Now leakage into the sewers might be considered a positive advantage if it were never reversed. It has resulted, as Mr. Kimber points out, iu lowering the level of the sub-soil water
of Calcutta from 4 to 9 feet ; but when the
sewers are gorged with mixed sewage and rain
the facilities for leakage in are equal to those for leakage out of the sewers, and the sub-soil then becomes the resevoir for the mixed contents
of the sewers, aud there can be no question that Such an interchange between the soil and the sewers is most dangerous to health. We cannot concur with Mr. Kimber in his opinion that the dilution of the sewage with eight times its volume of water can be regarded as in any way rendering the sewage innocuous, and we agree with Mr.
Latham that energetic means should be at once taken to remedy this evil. Mr. Latham gives
fiOgures which show that at certaiu seasons aud
in certain conditions of the tide the leakage from
the sewers into the sub-soil takes place with

336

INDIAN MEDICAL GAZETTE.

[Nov. 1892.

alarming facility. To remedy tliia evil Mr. During the high tides this low level outfall Latham proposes that the existing sewers should would form a reservoir for both the sewage be lined with bricks set in Portland Cement, and and rain water flowing through the sewers, and

that 110 lime such as has been hitherto used in on the tide falling, the gate would be opened

the construction of the Calcutta sewers should and the contents discharged.

ever be employed, because it is unable to with- It is almost inconceivable that sewers should stand the action of the sewage, and all sewers have ever been constructed on the principle should be set in Portland Cement mortar, or which is revealed in this correspondence?made

concrete. Clay, he says, should 011 no accouut be used to cement the joints of pipes, as it is liable to shrink after it dries; and if it does not dry, it

porous with the intention that they should re-
move the sub-soil water as well as the sewagOe,J
and at the same time with au outfall higher than

remains soft and plastic, and the weight falling 011 many parts of the town, so that the currents

the sewer trench squeezes it out and leaves ju the sewers when they are " running full"

openings at the top through which interchange may be reversed, and the subsoil converted into

takes place between the contents of the soil a storage of the contents of the gorged sewers,

and the sewers. It is, moreover, essentially without valves on the branch sewers to prevent

necessary that all sewers should be provided regurgitation and reversed currents; and that

with valves at their openings into the main non-hydraulic lime incapable of withstanding

sewer to prevent reflux and reverse currents the effect of sewage should have been employed

being set up within them. Kimber denies the leakage from the sewers into the sub-soil, hav-

in their construction. There are other points into which it is impossible for us to enter, such

ing found 110 evidence of this when the sewers as the provision of flushing tanks at the

are stripped. But Latham, 011 one occasion 011 heads of all minor sewers, and that of sectional

?which he examined a pipe sewer, found every flushing gates in the interior of the larger

joint leaking and the pipes half full of earthy sewers instead of the general tidal flushing,

matter washed into them from the outside; and which commend themselves to a non-professional

it was evident by comparing the sewer gaugings mind,' but which involve technical encOriueerincCrD

with the tidal records of Calcutta, that when- questions which we could not profitably discuss;

ever the tides are low and are rapidly falling, at that time of the day when the flow in the
sewers is increasing, there is either a direct loss

but there are others which we should have
liked Mr. Latham to have settled, such, for instance, as the disposal of the sub-soil Avater if

of the contents of the sewers or little gain. While on the other hand even at low water periods, if the tides are rising during the time that there is
an increase in the flow within the sewers, there is

the present sewers are made water-tight as he proposes, and as seems absolutely necessary for the salubrity of Calcutta so far as that depends 011 the purity of the soil on which

a gain in the volume flowing within the latter. the city stands. On this question he is silent, This constant interchange between the contents and we confess to having found great diffi-

of the sewers and the soil seems to us to be of culty in discovering any clear statement of

most serious and urgent importance ; and taking it into consideration it is 110 longer difficult to understand why it is that, while the health of Calcutta has undergone such marked improvement, especially as regards cholera, of late years, there is no similar diminution, but rather the

his scheme of providing a low level outfall in his original report. It is only alluded to in
paras. 30 and 38, in which the new outfall works are estimated to cost over twelve aud-a-half lacs
of rupees; and so far from his seeming to have originally intended a low level outfall, he alludes

reverse, a steady increase in the death-rate from fever, as shown in the annual reports of
the Health Officer.

to the additional cost of pumping the whole or
part of the sewage a second time between the present pumping station and the proposed point

To obviate this difficulty Latham proposes to of outfall. We cannot help thinking that the

make the sewers water-tight and to facilitate ?low level" portion of the scheme was an after-

the flow through them by providing a low level thought, else this which appears as the leading

outfall, which would be guarded against the feature of the scheme in the latter portions of

influx of the tides by a self-acting flood gate. the correspondence would surely have been more

Nov. 1892.]

SEAMEN IN CALCUTTA.

337

clearly stated. Such being the case, we must deprecate the discourteous, not to say contempt-
uous, tone of many of Mr. Latham's remarks as
uncalled for and unjustifiable and in marked contrast with the dignified attitude assumed by Mr. Kimber, with whom throughout the somewhat unpleasant correspondence our sympathies entirely go. All of this unpleasantness and misunderstandinCg5 migOht have been avoided if
the original plan of a joint report had not been departed from by Mr. Latham.

