HONORIS CAUSA.
During a recent discussion in the House of Commons, an Honorable Member stated that he had frequently noticed very ordinary men returning, after a few years' absence in India, with a
handle to their names, and that he was at a loss to understand what
extraordinary evidence of ability or merit had resulted in the transfiguration of the chrysalis " Mr." into the butterfly " Sir!" ?a little interlude in the Honorable Member's speech, the somewhat questionable wit of which could not certainly be directed against the medical services. For, in comparison with the honors, distinctions, and benefits not illiberally distributed among other departments, the medical service has hitherto been least favored. On scanning the Bengal Army List, we find out

Januakt 1, 1875.]

HONOEIS CAUSA.

21

of a total of upwards of three hundred and fifty medical officers, only two C.S.I.'s, three C.B.'s, and two in the receipt of good service pensions; while only one distinction of any kind whatever falls to the lot of the hundred and fifty gentlemen on the lists of the Bombay Medical Service! On the other hand, in the first three hundred and fifty names on the Bengal Staff Corps (excluding those in receipt of Colon-el's allowances) there are two K.C.B.'s, nearly thirty C.B.'s, about twelve C.S.I.'s, four K.C.S.I.'s, and three A.D.C.'s to the Queen. On taking all grades and departments mentioned in the Army List, there are thirteen Military Knights of the Bath, not one of whom is a
medical officer; there are sixty-one Military Companions, of whom three only are medical men; and there are eight Civil Companions, without any medical man. In the order of the Star of India, there are six Knight Commanders, no medical
officer being elevated to that grade; and there are eighteen
Companions, numbering three surgeons among the -list. Lastly* there are twenty-five good service pensions, of which two are received by medical officers. Of the Bengal Civil Service three hundred and forty-nine members possess three K.C.S.I.'s, four
C.S.I.'s, and seven C.B.'s. In addition, we not unfrequently hear of officials being in some manner or other distinguished after they leave the service; but among medical men there is
scarcely a solitary instance. Far be it from us to follow the example of the Honorable
Member, and to assert, or even insinuate, that the distinctions conferred have not been well earned and fairly deserved. Almost, without exception, we honestly believe such to have been
the case. But this cannot blind us to the fact that there are
men equally deserving among members of the Indian Medical Service, who have not received the honorary rewards to which, in all comparative justice, they are entitled. Neither does the knowledge that there are persons in the other services, who have been similarly passed over, render our own case any the
less irritating. In this particular instance at least, the sores of our friends bring no comforting salve for our own galls. Neither, on the other hand, do we regard our own disease, or our own sorrows, as the worst and most remarkable ever endured
by humanity. If we saw honors confined to those ruling over vast interests, and large questions, as the fortunes of states and the fate of dynasties, we might not consider our class hardly treated. But when we see honors descend from those
directing the great game, as played by kings and kaisers, to the small traffic of a local magnate wrangling over a road, or disputing over a feudatory zemindar, we cannot but esteem many of ourselves as equally worthy. "We are prepared, as a service,
to stand upon our own merits, and it is preposterous to suppose
that only those few medical officers, who have been singled out for decoration, are the only ones deserving, or that but one of the hundred and fifty medical men of the Bombay Service is worthy. It would be invidious to mention names among those now in this country. But, as a case in point, we may refer to a late Head of the Bengal Medical Department, a man who had served the Government faithfully for some forty years, acknowledged on all sides as a most skilful surgeon, who spent the morning and noon-tide of life in the investigation of disease, and who was permitted to depart to one of those bournes from which at least medical men never return (viz., Kensington or Bath) destitute of any personal mark of distinction whatever. These remarks are not penned in any carping spirit; neither are we

disposed to attach more importance to titular honors and distinctions than the occasion demands; for we have chosen the path of science, and that path, if sedulously and honorably pursued, brings to many its own peculiar reward, in the content which springs from doing good. But belonging, as we do, to a
public service, we cannot but feel that the claims of that service
are not considered, as we submit there is reason to expect they should be considered, when the distribution of worldly distinctions takes place. Being human, we must agree with Shakespeare, who long since observed that " it is pleasant to be made much of." It is a theory which every one knows to be false in fact, that virtue in real life is always productive of content. We therefore, however personally indifferent to the arbitrary rules guiding the distribution of honorary distinctions, cannot view the setting aside of the just claims of the service with the
stoical equanimity of a Diogenes. We are aware that it does
not much matter how the Apollo or the gladiator may be dressed; for the Apollo or the gladiator are still present. But the distinction between savage and civilized humanity lies not so much in qualities as in habits. Claiming to belong to civilized humanity, we cannot be altogether indifferent to the habits of our class, and to those things which, although of the world? worldly?the world nevertheless delighteth in. Paraphrasing a remark of Sir Astley Cooper's, we have no objection to remain untitled, if we can be useful. But it is the habit of the world
to confer some distinction on those supposed to be the most useful, and unless we have some earnest, in the extension of
the habit to our class, we can scarcely be satisfied in our own minds that we are useful. "We require some exhibition of the
proof positive.
We are, we confess, at a loss for the reason why the medical
service does not come in for a fair share of honors. As before
observed, it cannot possibly be that there are so few deserving amongst us. Neither can we suppose that it arises from medical
men declining to bow and kowtoio sufficiently to the powers that be ; tiiat they neglect to follow the eastern maxim, and when
the king saith at noon "it is night!" answer "behold the moon and stars!" for such a supposition would be altogether the reverse of complimentary to those presumed to recognize and distinguish merit. The reason must, therefore, be simply want
of forethought and consideration, to secure which the matter
only requires bringing forward. There appears to be?although we are loath to think there
is?a desire in some quarters to prevent medical men, whether belonging to the public services or otherwise, obtaining a fair
share of the flow from the fountain of honor. Not even self
sacrifice in the face of destroying disease, fully a3 noble as the feeling impelling Curtius to drive his war steed headlong into the gulf, or impelling Leonidas to sup with Pluto, so that he turned the Persian myriads from Thermopylae; not even conduct gallant as ancient or modern times can show ; not even the highest literary skill, or social qualities, has yet sufficed to create a medical peer. Yet as Dickens observed, "supposing we had this day a Baron Jenuer, or a Viscount Watt, or an Earl Stephenson, I wonder whether it would be cruelly disgraceful to our old nobility." When we see so many demonstrations of the truth of the assertion that " the robbery" (or in these days we might say successful commerce) of one age is the chivalry of the next, "we can scarcely think that a Lord Cooper or an Earl Christison would be misplaced." There are those, however,

22

THE INDIAN MEDICAL GAZETTE.

?who for childish reasons would deny the medical profession such distinctions. "We may, however, trust in time and in the progress of the world that they will not always he denied.

[January 1, 1875.

