89

90

91
Welcome address
About half of the human population lives and works in rural areas, mainly engaged in agricultural activities. This ancient human activity produces food and uses land in a world where the demand for food is growing very quickly, and the quality and quantity of food are basic needs to ensure the health of millions of people. At the same time, agricultural activities are capable of causing environmental resource depletion and varying levels of pollution. Likewise, rural areas are directly linked with the wellbeing of entire communities, as demonstrated by the recent outbreaks of infectious diseases that were triggered in rural settings. Despite their major social, cultural, ecological and demographic relevance, rural areas are largely neglected by scientific research, health prevention and social protection. Rural inhabitants are suffering from an evident gap in life quality, sanitation, income, and distribution of social protection and economic benefits, including occupational health protection and services, as compared to urban dwellers. Importantly, rural communities are organized in villages, where agriculture and related activities are carried out very often by entire families, in which women, children and elderly represent an important proportion. The village is the target of all preventive interventions in rural areas. Only a healthy village, inhabited by healthy dwellers, can produce healthy food for the entire community while respecting the living environment. At the end of the 16th International Congress on Rural Health, held in Lodi (Italy) on June 2006, the "Lodi Declaration on Healthy Villages" was approved, and the Campaign on Healthy Villages was launched. The Lodi Declaration highlighted that, due to the complexity and specificity of rural areas, the approach to rural health needs to be holistic, crosscutting, and integrative. Cross cutting needs include different levels of expertise (involving, for example, academia, rural health practitioners, rural community leaders and others), integration among disciplines (involving general medical practitioners, occupational and environmental medicine, agronomic sciences, veterinary medicine, rural sociology, and health systems), and collaboration among countries, particularly addressing the rural differences between the industrialized world, the growing developing countries and those countries still in transition. Consensus on these needs was partially achieved by the Cartagena Declaration issued during the 17th International Congress in Agricultural Medicine and Rural Health in October 2009, by means of which Latin America committed to strengthen Rural Health and Medicine in its region. The Lodi Declaration was adopted by the 18th International IARM Congress, and the Goa Declaration of December 12th, 2009 reaffirmed the relation between health, human rights, and economic growth underlining that health is more than a medical issue and that women's and children's health is a human rights issue and closely interlinked with the empowerment of women and girls resulting in gender equality.
However, the following specific objectives remain to be achieved: · Promoting universal coverage and access of disadvantaged populations to Primary Health Care and Occupational Health Care, to improve the health status of rural workers and dwellers and to reduce social inequalities; · Improving the overall quality of rural enterprises, to produce adequate amounts of high quality food, taking into account nutritional, safety and hygienic issues; · Reducing the environmental impact of agricultural activities all over in the world, through the diffusion of "green economy" principles; · Reducing the burden of disease attributable to occupational and environmental risks at the workplace, environmental pollutants generated by agricultural activities, and an unhealthy diet.

92
The opportunity: Milan is hosting the Universal Exhibition in 2015. The central topic is "Energy for Life, Feeding the Planet", by means of which the centrality of agriculture and rural areas in the world is strongly highlighted. This event constitutes a unique opportunity for organizing a four day event and calling professionals, experts and stakeholders from different areas of health and rural sciences unite jointly to address the varied aspects of agriculture and rural health, aimed at priority setting, making rural health problems visible, and finding feasible and sustainable solutions for rural populations.
The proposal This event is targeting all international experts in rural health in the world. It will be organized in such a way to ensure the participation of the main national and international associations and organizations involved in Rural Health along the lines already defined by WHO including its efforts towards the "Health for All" programme, by reinforcing Primary Health Care services as the way to achieve universal health service coverage, and, as highlighted in the den Haag Conference, towards the need of an integration of Occupational Health services within Primary Health Care. The main international associations active in the field will be also present: the International Association of Rural Medicine and Health (IARM), which has decided to organize during this Congress its own 18th World Congress, the Wonca party on Rural Practice, which will organize specific sessions and lectures, the International Commission on Occupational Health (ICOH), which will be present with five Scientific Committees, those on Rural Health, Occupational Toxicology, Toxicology of Metals, Occupational Health and Development, and Indoor Air quality and health together with the European Rural and Isolated Practitioners Association (EURIPA). This means that in this event all the main actors active in the world in the field of rural health will be present: this is a promise for a future of prevention and health in Rural Areas.
Prof. Claudio Colosio
Congress President

93
Minutes
Executive Board Meeting
The 19th International Congress of International Association of Rural Health and Medicine
At 14:30 on September 10, 2015 Room Chiostro, Province of Lodi, Italy
Attendees: Dr. Ashok Patil - Chair, Dr. Shuzo Shintani - Vice Chair Prof. Petar Bulat, Prof. Claudio Colosio, Prof. Hans Joachim Hannich, Dr. Tomihiro Hayakawa, Prof. Kanae Hamano, Dr. Kyeong Soo Lee, Dr. Hyun Sul Lim, Dr. Prof. Peter Lundqvist, Dr. Shengli Niu, Mr. Kazumi Ichikawa
Apologies from: Prof. Istavan Szilard, Dr. Masanobu Tatsumi
1. Opening address by the chair 2. Self-introduction was received from attendees. 3. The minutes of the Board Meeting at the 18th Congress in Goa was confirmed. 4. Agenda items
1) Statutes After circulating a draft of the new statutes which was prepared by Prof. H.J.Hannich with cooperation of Prof. P.Lundqvist and Prof. I.Szilard, comments on several articles were submitted from Japanese members. Taking the comments into consideration, Dr. A. Patil proposed his submission on the regarding articles.
-Art.4-2 National associations should become an affiliated member. Any members of the national association can become a full member with the payment of the full membership fee.
-Art.7 Regional Divisions will not need to be established.
-Art.9 The number of members present will constitute a quorum for the General Assembly and proxy should be permitted.
-Art.10.2 The Executive Board comprises the President, the President-elect, the Immediate Past President, three vice presidents, the Secretary General, the Treasurer as well as elected members.
-Art.10.3 Maximum number of the Board members should be twenty and proxy is admitted.
-Art.10.4 The Executive Committee will decide where to hold a meeting with general consensus.

94
-Art.10.5 A quorum for making binding decisions should not be set in the Board Meeting. Any decisions should be based on the number of members present.
-Art.13 Candidates for the leaders could be recommended by other members or be nominated by themselves.
-Art.14.4 Regarding election to the Executive Board, decisions will be made by simple majority and proxy voting should be permitted. We will have to explore more simple and easy ways of voting such as electronic ballot.
Prof. Hannich proposed in place of Prof. I. Szilard that the Past Presidents and the Secretary Generals should become Honorary Members and that should be added to the new statutes. He also referred that the WHO goal stated in Article 2 should be "Health in all" instead of "Health for all". The original "Health for all" was adopted.
Dr. S.Niu suggested that we would have to ensure main functions of IARM with certain visions. He emphasized to focus more on our congress which has been and will be one of the important objectives of our association. We will need to maintain good history of our association and appeal it to attract participants from agricultural countries especially in Asia.
All attendees approved the above and agreed to present them to the General Assembly.
2) Next Congress Dr. S. Shintani presented a proposal for holding the 20th Congress in Tokyo Japan, 2018. This proposal was unanimously accepted.
3) Lodi Declaration Dr. A. Patil made a few suggestions for Lodi Declaration. Prof. C. Colosio, the congress president of Lodi International Rural Health, accepted to consider the suggestions and try to incorporate them into the declaration which will be sent to Italian governments and could also be delivered to several other governments and authorities by attendees.
4) Others Dr. A. Patil requested transfer of the responsibility for the website management to the Secretariat for an easier membership application. The Secretariat will check with the responsible committee for website administration of JARM.

95

 19  
2015  9  10  1430 Room Chiostro, Province of Lodi, Italy
Dr. Ashok Patil, Dr. Shuzo Shintani , Prof. Petar Bulat, Prof. Claudio Colosio, Prof. Hans Joachim Hannich, Dr. Tomihiro Hayakawa, Prof. Kanae Hamano, Dr. Kyeong Soo Lee, Dr. Hyun Sul Lim, Prof. Peter undqvist, Dr. Shengli Niu, Mr. Kazumi Ichikawa
1.  2.  3.  18  4. 
 Patil 
Art.4.2   Art.7  Art.9  Art.10.2  3   Art.10.3  20  Art.10.4  Art.10.5   Art.13  Art.14.4  
Szilard  Art.2  WHO "Health for all""Health in all" "Health for all"

96
Dr. Niu  IARM  IARM  

5.  20   
6.  Dr. Patil Prof. Colosio   
7.  Dr. Patil  IARM  

97
Minutes
General Assembly The 19th International Congress of International Association of Rural Health and Medicine
At 17:00 on September 10, 2015 Room Chiostro, Province of Lodi, Italy
Dr. Ashok Patil chaired the General Assembly.
1. New statutes After careful, prospective and profound discussion about our new statutes, it was finally agreed to adopt the draft agreement as it is for the new statutes of IARM for next three years while incorporating the revisions that were approved at the preceding Board Meeting held on the same day. An article about email and electronic ballot which can be used for election will also be added to the statutes. However, the statutes will have to be fully considered, modified and revised in next three years, and should be finalized at the next congress in Tokyo. The new executive board will be in charge of working on this task. It was agreed unanimously.
2. Election of the president, the vice presidents, the president elect, and the members of the Board The Nomination committee nominated following members and approved by the Board. The Secretary General presented at the General Assembly and it was approved unanimously. The secretariat will announce the member of the Board shortly.
The President: Prof. Hans Joachim Hannich The Vice President: Prof. Claudio Colosio, Prof. Peter Lundqvist, Dr. Kyeong Soo Lee Treasurer: Dr. Tomihiro Hayakawa Secretary General: Dr. Shuzo Shintani
President Elect: Dr. Shuzo Shintani Secretary General Elect: Dr. Hiroyuki Tomimitsu
3. The 20th Congress The Board confirmed that the 20th of International Congress of IARM would be held in Tokyo, Japan 2018. Dr. S. Shinatani will be the congress president. It was presented at the General Assembly and approved unanimously.
4. Others Dr. A. Patil asked for the financial statement to be submitted to the General Assembly or circulated later to the members by the Secretariat. It was agreed by the Secretariat.
5. Speeches were made by the New President-Prof. H.J.Hannich, the Secretary General and the next congress president-Dr. S.Shintani, and the Immediate Past President-Dr. A. Patil.

98
  19  
2015  9  10  1700 Room Chiostro, Province of Lodi
 Dr. Ashok Patil Dr. Shuzo Shintani
1.    3  email   2018   20  
2.     Prof. Hans Joachim Hannich  Prof. Claudio ColosioDr. Kyeong Soo LeeProf. Peter Lundqvist  Dr. Tomihiro Hayakawa  Dr. Shuzo Shintani   Dr. Shuzo Shintani  Dr. Hiroyuki Tomimitsu
3.  20   20  
4.  
5.   Prof. H.J.Hannich  20  Dr. S. Shintani  Dr. A. Patil

99
New statutes of International Association of Rural Health and Medicine (IARM): Draft
Article 1: NAME
The International Association of Rural Health and Medicine (IARM) was originally founded under the name of "The International Association of Agricultural Medicine and Rural Health" in 1961. Its name has been changed into "International Association of Rural Health and Medicine" in 2009.
Article 2: OBJECTIVES
The International Association of Rural Health and Medicine is an independent Association of Rural Health experts from different scientific disciplines. According to the WHO goal of "Health for All in the 21st century", it aims at the sustainable health development of people living in rural and remote areas in the fields of
- Health of the general population - Rural occupational health - Environmental health.
To achieve these aims, the tasks of the association are:
 to publish professional journals and publications,  to formulate the official opinion of the Association on professional questions  to provide professional advice and opinion to governmental or social
organisations on the national and/or international level, on request or by decision of the executive board  to conduct professional competitions in various issues and aspects of rural health and medicine to establish awards, commemorative medals and prizes,  to collaborate with expert individuals organizations, as and when required, in undertaking various tasks for realising the objectives of the Association  to establish regional, national organisations and specialised commissions for the improvement of this branch of science
Article 3: MEMBERSHIP
3.1 The association recognizes four types of member:
1. Full Members (individual and collective) 2. Honorary Members 3. Associated Members 4. Affiliated members
1. FULL MEMBERSHIP is available for professionals and scientific bodies / organisations who are interested or involved in the field of rural health and medicine. Full members accept the statutes of the Association and pay a prescribed fee for a period of minimum three years. They are admitted by

100
the Association by passing a resolution to this effect at its Executive Board meeting. They will have voting rights.
2. HONORARY MEMBERSHIP is given to individuals who, because of their work in the field of rural health and medicine are elected by the General Assembly after being recommended by the Executive Board. Such persons once elected become permanent life members of the Association. They will have voting rights.
3. ASSOCIATE MEMBERSHIP is available for public or private corporate bodies who support the aims of the Association. Such bodies are expected to pay the prescribed membership fees. Associate members may participate in the General Assembly and other meetings. They may move motions and participate in discussions. However, they do not have the right to vote and cannot be elected to the Executive Board.
4. AFFILIATED MEMBERSHIP: Other scientific societies with an interest in rural health and medicine shall be eligible for Affiliated Society Membership
3.2 Application for membership shall be submitted in writing. The executive committee decides on the admission. A letter of complaint may be filed against a rejecting decision within a month after delivery, which is decided upon on the next statutory meeting of the members. The complaint decision shall be delivered in writing. There is no right of membership.
3.3 All members are entitled to advantages, given by the Association. Any member of the Association or its Boards may submit a proposal through the Executive Board to award a prize to an outstanding member.
3.4 The membership ends a) in the case of death (natural person) or dissolution (legal entity) of the member b) by withdrawal c) by exclusion from the association d) by exclusion due to removal from the membership list.
Article 4: MEMBERSHIP FEES
4.1 Individual members pay a membership fee valid for three years. The amount is decided on by the majority of the General Assembly (Art. 9) respectively effecting the following financial year.
4.2 Affiliated Societies and National Associations ( Art. 6) pay an annual membership fee. The amount of the gross fee for these members is based upon the number of individual members they have, calculated from Jan. 1 to cover the year ahead. The amount of the fee is decided by the General Assembly with the proviso that the per capita fee charged to any Member Society will not exceed 10% of the fee for the individual membership of that Affilated Society.

101
Article 5: RESIGNATION
5.1 Any member wishing to resign from IARM may do so by writing to the President or Secretary-General. Resignations have to be received before Jan. 1 of the year of resignation. Resignations are accepted by the Executive Board (Art.10) on the recommendation of President/Secretary.
5.2 Any Society or individual member can be removed from the membership list, if there are arrears of three (3) membership fees or if there exist other arrears of the member of at least this amount at the association.
5.3 A member can be excluded from the association, in case of a serious act against the interests of the association. Such termination is carried out by the General Assembly on the recommendation of the Executive Board. The exclusion is decided on by General Assembly with 2/3 majority. The Executive Board shall send a copy of the request for exclusion, including justifications, to the concerned member at least two weeks before the General Assembly. If there is a written statement of the concerned member, it shall be brought to the attention of the meeting of the members. The exclusion decision shall be communicated to the members by the Executive Board in writing and becomes effective upon delivery.
Article 6: NATIONAL ASSOCIATIONS
6.1 Considering the pecularities of rural health problems in different countries, National Associations may be established in the field of rural health and medicine. They organize activities in their country in association with other specialities and in accordance with the organisational framework of the country. They may hold independent meetings, collaborate with other organisations and elect their own Executive Board. National associations are acknowledged as members cooperating with the IARM.
6.2 The national associations may formulate their independent statutes and national programs. They acknowledge the Statutes of IARM and accept it. They coordinate their activities with the programs of IARM.
6.3 Representatives of the National Associations can participate in the Board Meeting of IARM with consultative rights
6.4 They shall remit an annual membership fee as prescribed by the Association. The membership will he cancelled if they do not pay the fee for three consecutive years (Art. 4.2).
6.5 The National Associations are actively involved in the activities of the Regional Divisions (Art. 7). The Presidents and Secretaries- General of National Associations have voting rights in the Regional Councils.

102
Article 7: REGIONAL DIVISIONS
7.1 Considering the peculiarities of rural communities due to different on geographical, life and work conditions, the Association may decide on the establishment of Regional Divisions on the recommendation of the Board. The Regional Divisions assist with the establishment of National Associations or Special Committees and support their work. They coordinate the activities of organisations in the field of rural health and medicine in the region and collaborate with other likeminded associations. They may also hold independent meetings.
7.2 The Regional Divisions comprise individual members working in rural health and National Associations.
7.3 The Regional Divisions are directed by the Regional Council comprising the President of the Regional Council , the Secretary-General of the Regional Council, the presidents of National Associations working in the region, Secretaries-General of National Associations and three to seven elected members.
7.4 The President, the Secretary-General and the members of the Regional Divisions are elected by open vote by the Regional Assembly on the recommendation of the President of IARM.
7.5 Assembly Meetings of the Regional Divisions are held once a year . Members of the Association and representatives of National Associations have voting rights.
7.6 Regional Divisions shall remit an annual membership fee as prescribed by the Association (Art. 4.2). The membership will be cancelled if they do not pay the fee for three- consecutive years.
Article 8: BODIES OF THE ASSOCIATION
8.1 The bodies of IARM are:
- the General Assembly - the Executive Board - the Nomination Board
8.2 Only members of IARM may be appointed to one or more of this body.
Article 9: GENERAL ASSEMBLY
9.1 The General Assembly is the main organ of the Association. It comprises all the members of the Association. It is responsible for all tasks, as far as they are not allocated to the Executive Board or other representative bodies of the Association.
9.2 The General Assembly is exclusively responsible for the following affairs:

103
a) Authorization of the budget that is set up by the Executive Board for the next financial year b) Election of the auditors and the acceptance of the auditing report from the auditors c) Regulation of the amount and maturity of the membership dues d) Electing and recalling the members of the Executive Board e) Change of the Charter f) Liquidation of the Association g) Decision on the complaint against the refusal of an application for membership h) Exclusion of an Association member i) Nomination of honorary members j) Decision on the establishment of further boards or representative bodies of the Association
9.3 The statutory meeting of the General Assembly takes place in conjunction with the International Congress which is normally held in every three years.
9.4 An extraordinary General Assembly may be held if requested by one third of the membership. An extraordinary meeting of the members shall be called up, if the Executive Board decides the summoning for urgent and important reasons or one tenth of the members demand the summoning of the Executive Board in writing to the President or Secretary-General while indicating reasons.
9.5 The General Assembly is called up by the Secretary-General of the Association in text form, complying with a term of at least one month, indicating the agenda. The invitation letter is considered as delivered to the member if it was directed to the address that was last given to the Secretariat of the Association.
9.6 Each member can demand the extension of the agenda until one week before the beginning of the meeting of the General Assembly by means of a message in text form. The Executive Board decides on the extension of the agenda. Afterwards and during the General Assembly requests for extending the agenda can only be accepted by decision of the meeting of the members with a 2/3 majority.
9.7 The General Assembly is led by the President, if prevented by the Vice-President. If no member of the board is present, the meeting determines the leader.
9.8 A decision of the General Assembly requires the assent of more than 50% of the valid members at the meeting. Such assent is shown by open vote.
9.9 The resolutions of the meeting have to be documented in a transcript. The person who takes the minutes is directed by the leader the meeting.
9.10 The transcript has to be signed by the chairman of the meeting. In case of multiple chairmen chairing the meeting, the most recent has to sign the entire transcript.
9.11 Every member is eligible to read the transscript.
9.12 The General Assembly can give itself bylaws.

104
Article 10: EXECUTIVE BOARD
10.1 As the executive organ of the Association, the Executive Board implements the policy decided by the General Assembly. It conducts the business of the Association and deals with all administrative tasks, as far as they are not assigned to another representative body of the Association by the charter or by law. In particular, it has the following tasks: a) Execution of the resolutions of the General Assembly, b) Summoning and preparation of the General Assembly , the chairing of the General Assembly by the president, the president elect or the three vice presidents, c) Planning of the budget for each financial year e) Admission and participation in the exclusion of members, f) Conclusion and termination of contracts of employment, g) Summoning of committees h) Outlining plans for cooperation with other scientific Associations and establishing programs, workshops and ad hoc working groups
10.2 The Executive Board comprises the President, the President Elect, the Immediate Past President, , three Vice Presidents, the Secretary General, the Treasurer, Presidents and Secretary Generals of Regional Chapters, the Presidents and Secretaries of Special Commissions as well as elected members. As a temporary member, it also comprises the Congress President of the Congress, at which the Executive Board meets.
10.3 The Executive Board is elected for three consecutive years by open vote by the General Assembly. It remains in office until the following election. If a member retires during the term of office, the full Board may elect a substituting member for the remaining term of office.
10.4 The Executive Board shall meet once a year. Between meetings of the Board, the President and the Secretary General are responsible for the administration of the Association. If necessary, they may consult with other members of the Board. The President reports on such work to the next meeting of the board.
10.5 In the Board meeting, the Board can make binding decisions if more than one third of its members are present. Such decisions are made by open vote with the President having a casting vote in addition to his/her substantive vote.
10.6 The third party authorisation of the Executive Board is limited. Acquisition, sale, burden and other liabilities of estate (and comparable estate based rights) as well as taking out a loan requires approval by the meeting of the members.
10.7 The Executive Board cannot alter the statutes of the Association. It can establish its own rules of procedure.
Article 11: THE PRESIDENCY
11.1 The Presidency comprises the President, the President Elect, the Immediate Past President. the Congress President, the three Vice Presidents, and the Secretary

105

General, the Treasurer. The function of the Presidency is to control the financial expenditure of the Association (see article 4).

11.2 -
-

The responsibility of the President is to represent the Association for matters which are the responsibility of the Association in all dealings with Third Parties preside over the Executive Board and the Presidency.

If the President is indisposed, the President Elect or one of the Vice Presidents will serve in that capacity.

11.3 The responsibility of the Congress President is to - organize and manage the next international scientific meeting of the Association - ensure accurate and complete financial accounting methods for the Congress as well as a balance sheet provided to the Board.

11.4 The responsibilitiy of the President Elect is to - represent the Association in absence of the President

11.5 The responsibility of the Secretary General is to - provide operational support to the Association - summon and prepare the Executive board meeting in cooperation with the President
- keep the minutes of the meetings and to distribute them to the members of the Executive Board, the Presidency and the General Assembly
- create the annual report and distribute it - to ensure implementation of Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly, the
Executive Board or the Presidency - represent the Association for matters which are delegated to him/her in all
dealings with Third Parties

11.6 The responsibility of the Treasurer is to - carry out the routine operations of the Association's bank account - prepare a balance sheet for the Executive Board

Article 12: THE SECRETARIAT
12.1 The Secretariat is composed of the Secretary General appointed by the General Assembly and staff members as may be necessary, appointed by the Secretary General, in consultation with the President.
12.2. The functions of the Secretariat are to
- execute all decisions of the President - prepare the annual work plan and budget and submit it to the General Assembly
for approval - execute the work plan approved by the President and manage the activities of
Association - manage the personnel and financial resources of the Association and sign the

106
commitment and disbursement authorisations in the name of Association - prepare the annual meeting of the Association and the meetings of other Committees as may be instituted by the Association - establish and implement regulations and procedures for the Secretariat - present to the Association an annual report on the activities and operations of the Association after the close of each fiscal year - prepare the report of the annual Meeting of the Executive Board - perform such other tasks and functions assigned by the Board / President.
Article 13: NOMINATION COMMITTEE
The Nomination Committee makes proposals for the nomination of the leaders / executives of the Association to the Board meeting. Proposals discussed and accepted by the Board are forwarded to the General Assembly. The Nomination Committee consists of three persons. The General Assembly on the recommendation of the Bureau elects them for three-years.
Article 14: MODE OF ELECTION
14.1 The elections take place at the meeting of the General Assembly. Its mode is determined by the leader of the General Assembly. The election must take place in writing and/or secretly, if 1/3 of the present members entitled to vote should request so.
14.2 Elections of the Executive Board take the form of written elections.
14.3 The General Assembly is quorate if at least one third of the members entitled to vote is present. Each member has one vote. A delegation of votes is not allowed. Decisions are made with a simple majority of the cast valid votes. Abstentions are not taken in account.
14.4 The members of the Executive Board are elected individually, first the President, then the Vice-President and at last the remaining members. The candidate who received more than half of the cast valid votes is considered to be elected.
Article 15: COMMISSIONS
The Executive Board may organise special commissions and approve their programs. Those convening such commissions are responsible for drafting their terms of reference, which must be approved by the Board. The Chairperson of the respective Commission is responsible for presenting an annual report of the work of the Commission to the Executive Board.

107
Article 16: FINANCE
16.1 The financial expenses of the Association are met by subscription and membership fees. The amount of subscription (individual, national and associate) is determined by the General Assembly following a proposal from the Executive Board.
16.2 The Treasurer is responsible for the financial routine operations of the Association (11.6). The Treasurer shall get the Balance sheets of the Association audited by the registered Chartered Accountant or follow any other such rule which is the law of the land.
16.3 The Executive Board will take the stock of the financial situation of the Association every year and prepare a budget for ensuing year.
16.4 The Presidency is responsible for all expenditure incurred by the Association.

Article 17: COLLABORATION WITH OTHER ASSOCIATIONS

17.1

The Collaborating Organizations / Associations will have reciprocal arrangements with IARM as regards the Executive Bureau. If the Collaborating Organization invites the IARM to become the Member of its Executive Committee / Board, then IARM shall also reciprocate the same. In case the Collaborating Organization offers any other position, e.g. observer to the Executive Committee, then IARM would also have the same and equa reciprocal arrangement.

17.2. This arrangement will not be applicable to any UN/WHO/ILO or similar organizations. Their official representatives will always be invited to join the Executive Bureau as its full-fledged members to perform an advisory function.

Article 18: CHANGES OF THE STATUTES

18.1 Amendments to the charter require the approval of 3/4 of the individual members.

18.2 To change the Association's purpose one half of the members entitled to vote has to be present at the General Assembly. In the case of the absence of a quorum, the votes can also be cast by postal vote or by electronic vote during an election period defined by the Presidency in the interim time between two General assemblies.

Article 19: DISSOLUTION

The dissolution of the Association will proceed with the agreement of the General Assembly 'when its objectives can no longer be achieved. The General Assembly may decide on its dissolution by a two -third majority of the members present at the General Assembly supporting this action following a secret ballot. Such ballots cannot be carried out unless all members have been given three months notice in writing of the intention to dissolve the Association.

108
Article 20: SIGNATURES
All instruments committing the Association shall be signed by the President or his/her representative, except for the matters delegated to the Secretary General
Article 21: LIABILITY
The Association is responsible for its liabilities on all its assets. Members and officers of the Association or its organs shall incur no personal liability in respect of the commitments of the Association

109
International Association of Agricultural Medicine and Rural Health (IARM) 
   1961  The International Association of Agricultural Medicine and Rural Health 2009  The International Association of Rural Health and Medicine(IARM)
  WHO 21  
       
  3.1 
1. 2. 3. 4.
1.    2.   3.    4. 

110
3.2   
3.3  
3.4  a) b) c) d)
 4.1  4.2  1  1    10
  5.1 
 5.2   5.3    
  6.1    IARM  6.2 IARM   6.3  IARM  6.4  

111
6.5  
7.  7.1     7.2  7.3   7.4 IARM   7.5  7.6  
  8.1 IARM              8.2  IARM 
  9.1   9.2  a) b) c) d) e) f) g) h) i) j)

112
9.3  9.4    9.5   9.6    9.7   9.8  9.9   9.10   9.11  9.12 
 10.1   a) b) c) d) f) g) h)
10.2    10.3   10.4   10.5 

113
 10.6   10.7  
 11.1   11.2  - -  11.3  - - 11.4  11.5  - - - - - - 11.6   
 12.1   12.2  - - - - - -

114
- - -
   
 14.1    14.2  14.3    14.4  
  
 16.1   16.2   16.3  16.4 
 17.1  IARM   17.2  UN/WHO/ILO  

115
 18.1  18.2   
   
  
  

116
The 20th Congress of International Association of Rural Health and Medicine (IARM), in Tokyo, Japan, 2018
Greeting from Japanese colleagues,
First of all, on behalf of the Japanese Association of Rural Medicine (JARM), we would like to extend our sincere congratulations to all the participants for your contribution to the 19th Congress in Lodi, Italy. We would also like to take this opportunity to express our deepest gratitude to Professor Colosio and his team for all the efforts in organizing this successful Congress.
Japanese colleagues are honored to hear that the Board of IARM decided to hold the 20th Congress in Tokyo, Japan, 2018. We will try our best to prepare for the Congress. The theme for the 20th congress will be "Challenges to community-based rural medicine in aging societies with declining productive populations". The following explains what this exactly means.
In 2014, the number of births in our country was about 1 million and the number of deaths was 1.26 million. That led to the population decline of 260,000. The population thus dropped for the eighth straight year. By the year of 2025, it is widely reported, almost one in every five Japanese people (18.1%) will be age 75 or over, and elderly needing long-term care and requiring help will increase to 8.17 million.
In September 2011, a medical journal the Lancet released a special series on Japan that commemorated the 50th anniversary of its attainment of a universal health insurance system. The world sees Japan as a rare country that provides access to prompt and high-quality medical care equitably at low cost for the people and maintains the world's longest life expectancy. The series made scientific analysis and verification of many facets of the Japanese universal health care system: the reasons of Japan's remarkable achievements in life expectancy in a brief period of time; the advantages and limitations of the system; the actual status of high-quality medical care at low cost; the results and challenges of the long-term care insurance system for elderly people with a rapidly aging society; and the future of the system which enables people to keep an excellent health level equitably at low cost. The series also provided recommendations for experts inside and outside of Japan.
Recently, global attention, particularly that of countries facing similar problems, is drawn to the universal health insurance system in Japan and how we address issues of declining birthrates and an aging society. JA Koseiren Hospitals (Agricultural Cooperative Hospitals), which we work for, play

117
important roles as public hospitals in community-based rural medicine throughout Japan. They would like to present their achievements and future visions to international medical professionals. JARM has a long history and a large membership base of 4,500 physicians and researchers. Dr. Wakatsuki (one of the founders of the association) organized the 4th IARM Congress in Nagano, Japan in 1969. It has been quite some time since then. So, we are excited to host a joint congress of IARM and JARM in Tokyo where we would be able to offer all IARM members high-quality scientific programs as well as a platform for discussion on rural medicine of this century with experts from all over the world.
I look forward to seeing you again in Japan, 2018.
English will be the official language. We will provide simultaneous interpretation services at lectures and symposiums to overcome language barriers.

2018 Joint Congress on Rural Medicine in Tokyo, Japan The 20th International Congress of the International Association of Rural Health and Medicine
(IARM) The 67th Annual Meeting of the Japanese Association of Rural Medicine (JARM)

Theme Challenges to community-based rural medicine in aging societies with declining productive populations

IARM Past Congresses

Year

Date

1 1961 July 6-12

2 1964 May 4-9

3 1966 September 26-30

4 1969 Sept. 30-Oct. 4

5 1972 May 10-15

6 1975 September 22-26

7 1978 September 17-21

8 1981 September 14-18

Country France Germany Czechoslovakia Japan Bulgaria U.K. USA France

City Tours Bad Kreuznach Bratislawa Usuda Verna Cambridge Salt Lake City Avignon

As of Sep.10, 2015 President
J. Vache G. Preuschen P. Macúch T. Wakatsuki Karaijev C.K. Elliott L.W. Knapp J. Dubrisay

118
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19

1984 1987 1991 1994 1997 2000 2003 2006 2009 2012 2015

September 10-14 August 27-31 November 10-12 July 10-13 September 7-10, May 25-27 July 20-23 June 18-21 October 13-16, December 10-12 September 8-11

New Zealand Hungary China Sweden USA Hungary Thailand Italy Colombia India Italy

Christchurch Pecs Beijing Stockholm Iowa City Pecs Ayutthaya Lodi Cartagena Goa Lodi

J. Stoke J. Tényi Zhang Zikuan S. Hoglund L.W. Knapp J.Tenyi Mukda Trishnananda C. Colosio J.R. Guzman Ashok Patil C. Colosio

October 21, 2015
Tomihiro Hayakawa, MD President, Japanese Association of Rural Medicine (JARM) Treasurer, International Association of Rural Health and Medicine (IARM)
Shuzo Shintani, MD Director of the International Committee, Japanese Association of Rural Medicine (JARM) Secretary General, International Association of Rural Health and Medicine (IARM)

119

120

121
 20 (IARM) in  2018

 Japanese Association of Rural Medicine (JARM) 19  International Association of Rural Health and Medicine (IARM)  in Lodi, Italy   Professor Colosio  
(IARM) 20  Congress 2018  "Challenges to community-based rural medicine in aging societies with declining productive populations " 
201410012626 820255 1 (18.1) 75817
2011950      
50   Community-based rural medicine  450019699 

122

21 2018 IARMJARMjoint congress

2018 


 2018 Joint Congress on Rural Medicine in Tokyo, Japan The 20th International Congress of the International Association of Rural Health and Medicine (IARM) The 67th Annual Meeting of the Japanese Association of Rural Medicine (JARM)

Theme Challenges to community-based rural medicine in aging societies with declining productive populations





 



1 1961.7.6-12



2 1964.5.4-9

 

3 1966.9.26-30





4 1969.9.30-10.4



5 1972.5.10-15



6 1975.9.22-26 7 1978.9.17-21

 

8 1981.9.14-18



9 1984.9.10-14

 

10 1987.8.27-30



11 1991.11.10-13 12 1994.7.10-13

 




J. Vache G.Preuschen
P. Macúch
 
C.K. Elliott L.W. Knapp J. Dubrisay
J. Stoke
J. Tényi  S. Hoglund

2015 
 
16120(1) 16150(11)
24450(42)
25496(417) 36653(43) 33250(38) 18130(72) 20483(85) 18250(105)
20360(70) 31450(52) 27200(64)

123

13 1997.9.7-10 14 2000.5.25-27 15 2003.7.20-23 16 2006.6.18-21 17 2009.10.13-16 18 2012.12.10-12 19 2015.9.8-9.11

   
 


L.W. Knapp J.Tenyi
Mukda Trishnananda C. Colosio
J.R. Guzman Ashok Patil C. Colosio

13170(59) 31280(48) 9215(19) 43350(38) 27142(12) 25400(24) 27248(29)

2015  10  21 

 Tomihiro Hayakawa, MD  (JARM)   (IARM) 
 Shuzo Shintani, MD  (JARM)   (IARM) 

124

125

126
19  International Congress on Rural Health
& The 4th International Conference Ragusa SHWA 2015
(Safety Health Welfare in Agriculture Agrofood and Forestry Systems)
Lodi, Italy September 8 - 11, 2015

127

128

129

130

131

132

133

134

135

136
Table of Contents
Keynote Lectures- September 9th 2015
Ethics in occupational and rural health Sergio Iavicoli, INAIL, Department of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, Epidemiology and Hygiene, Monte Porzio Catone, (Rome), Italy
Agricultural Health and Medicine Education--engaging rural practitioners to make a difference to farmers' lives. Susan Brumby RN, RM, DipFarm M'Ment, MHM, PhD. National Centre for Farmer Health, School of Medicine, Deakin University, Hamilton, Australia
Indoor air pollution in rural areas: a priority for public health Paolo Carrer. Dpt. Biomedical and clinical sciences "L. Sacco Hospital", university of Milan, Milan, Italy
Models and approaches for improving the access of rural workers to occupational health care
Agricultural Health program in Iran's Primary Health Care (PHC) system. Reza Ezzatian. Ministry of health and medical education, Environmental and occupational health center, Tehran, Iran.
Efficiency and quality of rural health services in region of Kazakhstan Kenesh Dzhusupov (1) - Karlygash Toguzbaeva (2) - Aigul Karakushikova (2) - Sirim Shayakhmetov (2), International school of medicine, International school of medicine, Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan (1) - Kazakh national medical university named after S.D. Asfendiyarov, Kazakh national medical university named after S.D. Asfendiyarov, Almaty, Kazakhstan (2)
Occupational medicine and rural health in R. Macedonia - current perspective and future directions Dragan Mijakoski - Jovanka Karadzinska-Bislimovska - Sasho Stoleski - Jordan Minov, Institute of Occupational Health of R. Macedonia, WHO CC, Faculty of Medicine, University "SS. Cyril and Methodius", Skopje, Macedonia
The use of occupational health care services and farmers' opinions concerning them in Finland Birgitta Kinnunen, Finnish Institute of Occupational Health, - Kuopio, Finland
Migrant agricultural workers and Canada's "not so universal" health care system: lessons learned from an effort to improve access to health care in the province of Ontario Stephanie Mayell (1) - Janet McLaughlin (2) - Michelle Tew (3), McMaster, University, Hamilton, Canada (1) Wilfrid Laurier, University, Brantford, Canada (2) - Occupational Health Clinics for Ontario Workers (OHCOW), Clinic, Hamilton, Canada (3)

137
Slavery and other forms of human exploitation
The exploitation of migrant workers in the Italian agricultural sector: a case study from a Ghanaian community of day-labourers in northern Apulia Gloria Carlini University, University of Milan-Bicocca, Milano, Italy
Enduring marginalities: Social hierarchiesandAgricultural labor in Southern Morocco Laura Menin, University of Milano Bicocca, University of Milano Bicocca, Milan, Italy
The Jijiyaabe and the Rimbe of Southern Senegal. The rural predicament of the legacies of slavery Alice Bellagamba, University of Milan-Bicocca, University, Milan, Italy
The social life of the global greenhouses. Stigma, servile work and labourers' vulnerability in Jordanian agribusiness. Van Aken Mauro, Dipartimento di Scienze Umane per la Formazione, Università Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy
Public Health Strategies and governance in rural areas
The use of QFD for safety assessmkent of machinery. Mario Fargnoli (Italian Ministry of Agriculture), Massimo Tronci (Sapienza University of Rome)
International and regional approaches to safety and health requirements for designing agricultural and forestry machinery. Antoon Vermeulen, CNH Industrial Belgium N.V.
Market surveillance activity as a way to ensure health and safety of machinery, eliminate unfair competition and help manufacturers in designing. L. Vita
A new way to register and prevent accidents involving agricultural and forestry machinery. E. Ariano, V. Laurendi
Diagnosis and prevention of musculoskeletal disorders in agriculture
Comparison of the Strain Index and OCRA Checklist for Risk Analysis of MSDs JOHN ROSECRANCE (1) - LELIA MURGIA (2) - ROBERT PAULSEN (3), COLORADO STATE UNIVERSITY, OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND ERGONOMICS, FORT COLLINS, United States (1) UNIVERSITY FO SASSARI, AGRICULTURAL ENGINEERING, SASSARI, Italy (2) - COLORADO STATE UNIVERSITY, OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY ADN ERGONOMICS, FORT COLLINS, United States (3)
Differences in musculoskeletal occupational disease incidence and notifications between the Po Valley and the Appennines. Bottoli E (1), Foresti C (1), Cervino D (2), Ottone M (1), Mattioli S (1), Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University of Bologna, Section of Occupational Medicine, S.Orsola- Malpighi Hospital, Via Palagi 9 -

138
40138 Bologna - Italy (1), Workplace Prevention and Safety Service (SPSAL) of the south area of Bologna district - Italy (2).
Dairy Consortium International Perspectives on Health and Safety among Dairy Workers: Challenges, Solutions & the Future
Comparison of upper limb muscle activity between US and Italian industrialized Dairy operations Masci F.1, Mixco A.2, Colosio C.1, Rosecrance J. 2, 1 Department of Health Sciences of the University of Milan and International Center for Rural Health of San Paolo Hospital, Milan - Italy 2 Department of Environmental and Radiological Health Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado - USA
Dairy Worker Safety Training: Current Challenges and Opportunities for Enhanced Effectiveness I. Noa Roman-Muniz, DVM, MS, John Rosecrance, PhD, Lauren M. Menger, MS, Florencia Pezzutti, MA, Flor Amaya, MV, Lorann Stallones, MPH, PhD
Ergonomic challenges in modern milking parlors Dr. Martina Jakob, Leibniz-Institute for Agricultural Engineering Potsdam Bornim e.V., Research Institute, Potsdam, Germany
Occupational health and safety experiences in automatic milking Janne P. Karttunen (1) - Risto H. Rautiainen (2), TTS Work Efficiency Institute, -, Rajamaki, Finland (1) Department of Environmental, Agricultural and Occupational Health, College of Public Health, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, United States (2)
Milking their Health Susan Brumby (1) - Andrew Smith (2), National Centre for Farmer Health, Deakin University & Western District Health Service, Hamilton, Australia (1) - Faculty of Health, Federation University, Ballarat, Australia (2)
Health of the Rural Population and workers
The current status of knowledge about risk of hemolymphatic cancer among farmers Pierluigi Cocco, University of Cagliari, Department of Public Health, Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Occupational Health Section, Monserrato, 09042, Italy
Health of the Serbian rural population Petar Bulat (1) - Stefan Mandic-Rajcevic (2), School of Medicine, Serbian Institute of Occupational Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia (1) - International Centre for Rural Health and Department of Health Sciences, San Paolo Hospital, University of Milan, Milan, Italy (2)
The potential to detect and prevent health problems in the agriculture sector by using OHS data Lode Godderis (2) - Chris Verbeek (1) - Matthias Coenen (1) - Martijn Schouteden (1), Idewe, External Service for Prevention and Protection at Work, Interleuvenlaan 58, 3001 Heverlee, Belgium (1), Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Centre for Environment and Health, Kapucijnenvoer 35/5, 3000 Leuven, Belgium (2)

139
Heat stress, dehydration, and kidney function in sugarcane cutters in El Salvador - a cross-shift study of workers at risk of Mesoamerican nephropathy Ramón García-Trabanino (1) - Emmanuel Jarquín (2) - Catharina Wesseling (3) - Richard J Johnson (4) -, Marvin González-Quiroz (5) - Ilana Weiss (6) - Jason Gkaser (6) - Juan José Vindell (7) - Leo Stockfelt (8) Carlos Roncal (4) - Tamara Harra (4) - Lars Barregard (8), Scientific Board, Department of Investigation, Hospital Nacional Rosales, San Salvador, El Salvador (1) - Agency for Agricultural Health and Development, AGDYSA, San Salvador, El Salvador (2) - Unit of Occupational Medicine, Institute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden (3) - Division of Kidney Diseases and Hypertension, University of Colorado, Denver, United States (4) - Research Centre on Health, Work and Environment (CISTA), National Autonomous University of Nicaragua at León, León, Nicaragua (5) - the La Isla Foundation, the La Isla Foundation, León, Nicaragua (6) - Universidad Nacional de El Salvador, Universidad Nacional de El Salvador, El Salvador, El Salvador (7) - Occupational and Environmental Medicine, Sahlgrenska University Hospital and University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden (8)
Long-term cognitive problems after toxic inhalation incidents Annet Lenderink (1) - Herman Bartstra (1) - Evelien van Valen (1) - Michelle Bertelkamp (1) - Gert van der Laan (2) - Frank van Dijk (1), Netherlands Center for Occupational Diseases/ Coronel Institute, AMC/University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands (1) - former: Netherlands Center for Occupational Diseases/ Coronel Institute, AMC/University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands (2)
Promotion and coordination of health surveillance in agriculture in Mantua province Mauro D'Anna (1) - Roberto Trinco (2) - Maria Rosa Freddo (2) - Simona Donini (2) - Milva Barigazzi (2) Elena Toninelli (3), Unità Operativa Ospedaliera di Medicina del Lavoro, A.O. Istituti Ospitalieri di Cremona, Cremona, Italy (1) - Servizio Prevenzione e Sicurezza Ambienti di Lavoro, Azienda Sanitaria Locale della Provincia di Mantova, Mantova, Italy (2) - Scuola di Specializzazione in Medicina del Lavoro, Università degli Studi di Brescia, Brescia, Italy (3)
Exposure to organic dusts in rural settings
Organic dust contaminated with LPS is still the predominant exposure in animal breeding operations Torben Sigsgaard, Aarhus University, Dept of Public Health
Quantifying Farmers' Exposure to Respirable Grain Dust while Performing Work around Grain Bin Storage Facilities S. Dee Jepsen (1) - Chris Harner (2) - Yang Geng (1), Department of Food, Agricultural & Biological Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, United States (1) - Berkley Agri-Business Risk Specialists, W. R. Berkley Company, Columbus, United States (2)
Prevalence of chronic respiratory symptoms, lung function impairment, and airway responsiveness comparison between cow breeders and crop farmers Sasho Stoleski (1) - Jovanka Karadzinska Bislimovska (1) - Jordan Minov (1) - Dragan Mijakoski (1), Institute for occupational Health of R. Macedonia, Institute for occupational Health of R. Macedonia, Skopje, Macedonia (1)

140
Exposure to organic dust in a farrowing-weaning farm as a possible risk for human and pigs: One Health Approach. C. Baldini (1), F. Beretta (2), C. Colosio (2), M. Guarino (1), Department of Health, Animal Science and Food Safety, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Milan (1), Department of Health Sciences of the University of Milan and International Center for Rural Health of San Paolo Hospital, Milan - Italy (2)
Environmental Health in Rural Areas
Across the globe: Healthy Farmers, Healthy Farms --The Sustainable Farm Families Project Jordan Jensen (1) - Susan Brumby (2) - Laura Nelson (1), Farm Safety Centre, Farmer Organization / Government, Raymond, Canada (1) - National Centre for Farmer Health, Deakin University / Western District Health Service, Hamilton, Australia (2)
Mesothelioma and sinonasal cancer risk in agriculture Carolina Mensi (1) - Gaia Varischi (2) - Barbara Dallari (1) - Pier Alberto Bertazzi (3) - Luciano Riboldi (1) -, Dario Consonni (1), Department of Preventive Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda - Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy (1) - School of Occupational Health, University of Milan, Milan, Italy (2) - Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, Universty of Milan, Milan, Italy (3)
Improving the professional competency of Health Professionals - locating the `lost tribe' in Farm Family Health Andrew Smith (1) - Susan Brumby (2) - Amber McDonald (2), Federation University Australia, School of Nursing Midwifery and Health care, Ballarat, Australia (1) - National Centre for Farmer Health, Western District Health Service, Hamilton, Australia (2)
Factors affecting sustainable solution for treatment of waste water treatment or small villages in the West Bank (Palestine) Rafael S. Carel, Zobida Esery School of Public Health, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel and IPSO, Jerusalem
Tremolite asbestos exposure in a rural area: personal sampling campaign results Antonio Baldassarre (1) - Luigi Vimercati (1) - Vito Luisi (1) - Gabriella Cauzillo (2) - Silvano Dragonieri (3) Marina Musti (1), Interdisciplinary Department of Medicine - Occupational Medicine "B. Ramazzini", University of Bari, Bari, Italy, (1) - Policy Office of Primary Prevention, Basilicata Region, Potenza, Italy (2) Department of Respiratory Diseases, University of Bari, Bari, Italy (3)
Zoonoses in agriculture and rural areas
Hepatitis E virus infection in rural health: an emerging occupational risk? De Schryver Antoon (1) - François Guido (1) - Hambach Ramona (1) - Tabibi Ramini (2) - Van Sprundel Marc (1) - Colosio Claudio (2), Epidemiology and Social Medicine, University of Antwerpen, Antwerp, Belgio (1) Department Health Sciences, University of Milan, Milan, Italia (2)
Zoonotic Pathogens are Occupational Hazards to US Livestock & Poultry Workers Richard Bruno, MD MPH - Ellen Silbergeld, PhD, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, United States

141
The prevalence of zoonotic chlamydial infection in farmers of Kyrgyzstan Kenesh Dzhusupov (1) - Anara Kutmanova (2) - Vera Toigombaeva (3), International school of medicine, International school of medicine, Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan (1) - Kyrgyz state medical academy, Republican hospital, Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan (2) - Kyrgyz-Russian Slavic university, Kyrgyz-Russian Slavic university, Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan (3)
The level of tetanus immunity in the agricultural workers in Lombardy Region, North of Italy Ramin Tabibi - Pietro Bianchi - Fancesco Beretta - Gabri Brambilla - Camilla Mussini - Claudio Colosio, ICRH, University of Milan, Milan, Italy
The Status and Epidemiological Characteristics of Zoonoses in Korea Hyun-Sul Lim, Department of Preventive Medicine, College of Medicine; Center for Farmers' Safety and Health for Infectious Diseases in Farmers, Dongguk University, Gyeongju, Republic Of Korea
Biological hazards among meat industry workers Gabriella Luci Maria Martina (1) - Antonio Baldassarre (1) - Silvano Dragonieri (2) - Angela Longo (1) Sabrina Cannone (1) - Angela Dambrosio (3) - Giuseppina Caggiano (4) - Luigi Vimercati (1) - Marina Musti (1) Occupational Medicine, University of Bari, Bari, Italy (1) - Respiratory Diseases, University of Bari, Bari, Italy (2) - Veterinary Medicine, University of Bari, Bari, Italy (3) - Hygiene, University of Bari, Bari, Italy (4)
WMSDs and Occupational Health
Agricultural machinery injuries in Finland 2004-2014 Risto Rautiainen, Jarkko Leppälä, Matts Nysand, Ari Ronkainen, Natural Resources Institute (Luke), Finland
Common risk factors for agricultural injury Rohan Jadhav, Gleb Haynatzki, Chandran Achutan, Shireen Rajaram, Risto Rautiainen, University of Nebraska Medical Center, College of Public Health, Omaha, United States
Keynote lectures- 10th September 2015
The IARC Monographs, evaluations of the carcinogenicity of pesticides and on-going research Kurt Straif, IARC, WHO, Lyon, France
UV induced Skin Cancer and Eye effects: neglected occupational risks! Swen Malte John (1) , Fabriziomaria Gobba (2), Dept of Dermatology, University of Osnabrueck, Osnabrueck, Germany (1), Chair of Occupational Medicine, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy (2)

142
Biological monitoring of Pesticides Exposure in Rural Areas
Blood Cholinesterase Activities over Two Years among Latino Farmworkers in the United States: Pesticide Exposure Evidence and Health Implications Sara Quandt (1) - Carey Pope (2) - Haiying Chen (1) - Thomas Arcury (1), Wake Forest School of Medicine, Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, NC, United States (1) - Oklahoma, State University, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK, United States (2)
Comparison of persistent symptoms and cholinesterase levels in laborers in three stages of the agricultural process Martha Edilia Palacios Nava (1) - Guadalupe Silvia García de la Torre (1), Public Health Department, Faculty of Medicine, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México D.F., Mexico (1)
Health effects related to pesticide exposure and blood cholinesterase activity among elderly farmers in northeastern Thailand Thitirat Nganchamung, Wattasit Siriwong College of Public Health Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand
Urine and hair specimens for biomonitoring short and long term penconazole exposure Silvia Fustinoni (1) - Rosa Mercadante (1) - Elisa Polledri (1) - Federico Maria Rubino (2) - Stefan MandicRajcevic (2) - Claudio Colosio (2) - Angelo Moretto (3), Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of Milano and Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy (1) - Department of Health Sciences, University of Milan, San Paolo, Hospital Unit, and International Centre for Rural Health, milan, Italy (2) - Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, University of Milano, and International Centre for Pesticides and Health Risks Protection (ICPS), ), Luigi Sacco Hospital, Milan, Italy (3)
Biological Monitoring on Green house workers in Yazd Province, Yazd, Iran S. Bakand, Y. Dehghani, MR. Gohari, MH. Mosadegh, SJ. Mirmohammadi, M. Rafiei, Health Faculty, Iran University of Medical Sciences,Tehran- Iran
Psychosocial health risk & workforce ageing
Health promotion for aged rural workers. The European study Prohealth65+ Magnavita N1, Poscia A1, Moscato U1, Ricciardi W1, Golinowska S2. Department of Public Health, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy (1); Institute for Public Health, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland (2)
Emerging issues related to workfoce aging and the EU ECapacit Project Maryam Sokooti (1), Piotr Sakowski, Claudio Colosio (1) on behalf of the whole E-capacit8 Consortium. International Centre for Rural Health of the University Hospital S, Paolo, Milano and Department of Health Sciences of the University of Milano (1), Nofer Institute of Occupational Medicine, Lodz, Poland (2)

143
Alcohol-related morbidity in a rural area in Germany Katharina Lau & Hans-Joachim Hannich, Institute for Medical Psychology, University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany
Mentally challenging for farmers to apply advanced technology and automated systems? Christina Lunner Kolstrup (PhD) and Torsten Hörndahl (lecturer) Department of Work Science, Business Economics & Environmental Psychology, Swedish University of agricultural Sciences, Alnarp, Sweden- Department of Biosystems and Technology, Swedish University of agricultural Sciences, Alnarp, Sweden
Environment Safety, People Health Protection and Welfare
Poisonous bites and stings: a natural risk in the natural environment Andrea Giampreti (1) - Marta Crevani (1) - Francesca Chiara (1) - Giulia Scaravaggi (1) - Azzurra Schicchi (1) Eleonora Buscaglia (1) - Davide Lonati (1) - Sarah Vecchio (1) - Valeria Margherita Petrolini (1) - Carlo Alessandro Locatelli (1), Maugeri Foundation, Maugeri Foundation - University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy (1)
Acute poisonings in farmers and fishers in Italy: a poison control center based 5 years case series /observation Davide Lonati (1) - Marta Crevani (1) - Sarah Vecchio (1) - Andrea Giampreti (1) - Valeria Margherita Petrolini (1) - Eleonora Buscaglia (1) - Francesca Chiara (1) - Giulia Scaravaggi (1) - Azzurra Schicchi (1) - Carlo Alessandro Locatelli (1), Maugeri Foundation, Maugeri Foundation - University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy (1)
Modelling exposure to pesticide in Rural Areas
Matphyto: a French program for retrospective pesticide exposure assessment by using CEM Johan Spinosi (1) - Laura Chaperon (2) - Céline Gentil (3) - Matthieu Gouy (4) - Mounia El Yamani (1), French Institute for Public Health Surveillance, -, Saint-Maurice, France (1) - Umrestte, University Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Lyon, France (2) - French Institute for Public Health Surveillance, -, Fort de France, Martinique (3) French Institute for Public Health Surveillance, -, Saint-Denis, Reunion (4)
CIA: a new tool to assess retrospective occupational exposure to pesticides in France Laura Chaperon (1) - Johan Spinosi (2) - Laurent Perrier (1) - Mounia El Yamani (2), Umrestte, University Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Lyon, France (1) - French Institute for Public Health Surveillance, - Saint-Maurice, France (2)
Biological Monitoring for Pesticide Risk Assessment in Farmers and Rural Population with a Tiered Protocol Federico Maria Rubino - Stefan Mandic-Rajcevic - Claudio Colosio, Department of Health Sciences and International Centre for Rural Health, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy
From Field Studies to Scenario-Based Risk Assessment: an Online Pesticide Risk Assessment Platform Stefan Mandic-Rajcevic - Federico Maria Rubino - Claudio Colosio, International Centre for Rural Health, Department of Health Sciences, San Paolo Hospital, University of Milan, Milan, Italy

144
Education for Basic Occupational Health in Agriculture (2)
Education for Basic Occupational Health in Agriculture: a round table Van der Laan G and Van Dijk F
Noise, Vibration, Dust, Endotoxin, Microorganism
Risk from vibration and noise on agricultural tractors Peretti A, Bonimini F, Pessina D, Giordano D, Gibin M, Colosio C, Mucci N M, Nuccio M, Pasqua di Bisceglie A
Chemicals and agrochemicals in rural areas
Problematic of the pesticides use by the gardeners in Burkina Faso Antoine Vikkey HINSON (1) - Sandrine M. SANON LOMPO (2) - Hervé LAWIN (3) - Paul AYELO (4) Benjamin FAYOMI (4), Unity of Teaching and Research in Occupational Health:, University of Abomey-Calavi, Cotonou, Benin (1) - Unity of Training and Research in Health Science, Public Health department: University of Ouagadougou, University of Ouagadougou, Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso (2) - Faculty of medicine of Porto-Novo, Univeristy of Porto Novo, Porto Novo, Benin (3) - Unity of Teaching and Research in Occupational Health: University of Abomey-Calavi, University of Abomey Calavi, Cotonou, Benin (4)
Investigating the impacts of endocrine disrupting compounds on sperm health: A new potential effect biomarker Melissa J. Perry, ScD, MHS, Professor and Chair, Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, George Washington University, Washington DC, USA, Milken Institute School of Public Health, The George Washington University, Washington DC, United States
Pesticides intoxication Sarah Vecchio - Marta Crevani - Andrea Giampreti - Valeria Margherita Petrolini- Eleonora Buscaglia Francesca Chiara - Giulia Scaravaggi - Azzurra Schicchi - Davide Lonati - Carlo Alessandro Locatelli Maugeri Foundation, Maugeri Foundation - University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy
Industry Point of View on Endocrine Disruptors E. Vassallo
Pesticide immunotoxicity: from in vivo evidence to mechanistic understanding Emanuela Corsini, Laboratory of Toxicology, DiSFeB, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy
The Effectiveness of an Educational Intervention to Improve Knowledge and Perceptions for Reducing Organophosphate (OP) Pesticides Exposure among Indonesian Farmworkers Suratman Suratman - Kirstin Ross - Kateryna Babina - John Edwards Health and Environment Group, School of the Environment, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Flinders University, Adelaide, Australia (1)

145
Prevention of occupational skin diseases in agriculture
Contact allergy to the European Baseline Series in agricultural workers, 2009-2012 Francesca Larese Filon (1) - Buttazzo Silvia (2) - Uter Wolfgang (3), University of Trieste, Unit of Occupational Medicine, Trieste, Italy (1) - University of Trieste, Unit of Occupational Medicine, ETrieste, Italy (2) - University of Erlangen, Nurnberg Dept. of Medical Informatics, Biometry and Epidemiology, Erlangen, Germany (3)
Ultraviolence: sun induced occupational skin cancer Swen Malte John, MD, PhD, Dept. Dermatology, Environmental Medicine, Health Theory, Faculty of Human Sciences, UNIVERSITY OF OSNABRUECK BACKGROUND:
Skin barrier protection Swen Malte John(1) and Sanja Kezic(2) Dept. Dermatology, Environmental Medicine, Health Theory Faculty of Human Sciences, University of Osnabrueck, (1) Coronel Institute of Occupational Health , Academic Medical Centre Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands (2)
Occupational exposure of workers with GENESIS-UV: dosimetric results in Germany Dr. Marc Wittlich, Head of unit radiation, Institute for Occupational Safety and Health of the German Social Accident Insurance (IFA), Alte Heerstraße, 111, 53757 Sankt Augustin, Germany
Migration and Health
Self-reported heat illness among migrant Hispanic farmworkers in North Carolina Phillip Summers (1) - Jennifer Talton (2) - Sara Quandt (3) - Thomas Arcury (1), Department of Family and Community Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, United States (1) - Department of Biostatistical Sciences, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, United States (2) - Department of Epidemiology and Prevention, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, United States (3)
Employment policies related to immigrant workers in the dairy industry: A comparative policy analysis across 10 countries Victoria Buchan - Louise Quijano, High Plains Intermountain Center for Agricultural Health and Safety, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, United States
A Longitudinal Analysis of Mexican-Born Farmworkers' Depressive Symptoms across Two Growing Seasons in North Carolina Joanne Sandberg (1) - Haiying Chen (2) - Sara Quandt (3) - Thomas Arcury (1), Department of Family and Community Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, United States (1) - Department of Biostatistical Sciences, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, United States (2) - Department of Epidemiology and Prevention, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, United States (3)
Living conditions, work and health of Mexican migrant farm workers Martha Edilia Palacios Nava, Public Health Department, Faculty of Medicine, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México D.F., Mexico

146
Migrant Workers in Swedish Agriculture - a Challenge and a Solution for Farmers and Growers Peter Lundqvist - Mozhgan Zachrison - Catharina Alwall Svennefelt, Department of Work Science, Business Economics and Environmental Psychology, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Alnarp, Sweden
Keynote lectures - 11th September 2015
Access to Health Care - Greatest Challenge for Rural and Remote Health Ashok Vikhe Patil, International Association of Rural Health & Medicine, Pravara Institute Of Medical Sciences, Loni Bk, India
A Swedish strategy for safety and health in agriculture - from zero vision of fatalities to certification of working conditions P. Lundqvist , C. Alwall Svennefelt, Department of Work Science, Business Economics and Environmental Psychology, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Alnarp, Sweden (1)
GPs and Occupational Health: the How to Achieve the dual goal of access and quality in rural health care Tanja Pekez-Pavlisko, EURIPA Interim President, WONCA Wokring Party on Rural Practice - Co-chair
Impact of Globalisation on Rural Workers' Working Conditions and Occupational Health Prof. Jorma Rantanen, MD, PhD
Poster Presentation
Health of the rural population
Work Organization and Occupational Health and Safety in Australian and United Kingdom Horticulture
Active search of occupational and work-related diseases using administrative databases: a pilot project on musculoskeletal disorders F. Beretta (1), G. Varischi (1), M. Mendola (1), E. Ariano (2), R. Pirola (2), G. Brambilla (1), C. Colosio (1) Department of Health Sciences of the University of Milan and International Center for Rural Health of San Paolo Hospital, Milan - Italy (1), SPSAL Health Local Unit of Lodi, Lodi - Italy (2)
Is rural a safe place to live and work? Zsuzsanna Farkas-Pall, MD, PhD, University Assistant, UNIVERSITY OF ORADEA, University Of Oradea, ORADEA, Romania
A preliminary survey involving the elderly living alone in a mountainous area for the difficulty of shopping, their economic situations, diet, and nutritional intake Tatsumi HAYASHI (1), Yoshiharu FUKUDA (2) , Midori ISHIKAWA (3) and Nobuko MURAYAMA (4) Kyushu Nutrition Welfare University, Dept. of Food and Nutrition (1), Graduate School of Public Health, Teikyo University (2), National Institute of Public Health, Dept. of Health Promotion (3), University of NIIGATA PREFECTURE, Dept. of Health and Nutrition (4)

147
Effects of oral exercise on oral function and oral health related quality of life of the elderly Kim Ju-Young (1), Hwang Tae-Yoon (2), Lee Kyeong-Soo (2), Department of Community Health Services, Cheongsong-gun Health Center, Gyeongsangbuk-do, Korea, Republic Of (1) Department of Preventive Medicine & Public Health, Yeungnam University, Daegu, Korea, Republic Of (2)
Self- and familial awareness of hepatitis status among hepatitis B and hepatitis C carriers in Korean rural areas Kweon Sun-Seog (1), Shin Min-Ho and Choi (2) Jin-Su (2), Jeonnam Regional Cancer Center, Chonnam National University Hwasun Hospital, Jeonnam, Korea, Republic Of (1), Department of Preventive Medicine, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic Of Korea (2)
Is it possible to eliminate MERS ? - From the experience of brucellosis control in South Korea Kwan Lee, Department of Preventive Medicine, Dongguk University College of Medicine, South Korea
The Effect of Health Education Program on Dysipidemia of Male Workers Mi Sook Lee, Jun Ho Shin, Kyeong-Soo Lee, Presenting author: Jun Ho Shin, Department of Preventive Medicine, Chonnam National University Medical School, 160 Baekseo-ro, Dong-gu, Gwangju, 501-746, South Korea Korean Industrial Health Association Branch of Gyeongsangbuk-do Province, 28 Gongdan-ro, Jinryangeup, Gyeongsan City, Gyeongbuk-do , South Korea (1), Department of Preventive Medicine, Chonnam National University Medical School, 160 Baekseo-ro, Dong-gu, Gwangju, 501-746, South Korea (2), Dept. of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, College of Medicine, Yeungnam Univ. 170, Hyeonchoongro, Nam-gu, Daegu 705-035, South Korea (3)
The Effects of School-based Fissure Sealant Program for Preventing Dental Decay in the Permanent Teeth of Schoolchildren in Rural and Urban Areas Mae Sook Jun (1), Worl-Sun Seo (2), (3), Kyeong-Soo Lee (4), Tae-Yoon Hwang (4), Chang Suk Kim(5), Mi-Kyung Kim (6), Presenting author: Worl-Sun Seo(Ph. D. candidate), Department of Public Health, Yeungnam University, 280 Daehak-Ro, Gyeongsan, Gyeongbuk 712-749, South Korea, Division. of Dental Hygiene, Gimcheon City Public Health Center, Gyeongsangbuk-do Province, South Korea (1), Dept. of Public Health, Yeungnam Univ. 280 Daehak-ro, Gyeongsan City, Gyeongbuk-do 712-749, South Korea (2), Dept. of Public Health, Graduate School, Yeungnam University, South Korea (3), Dept. of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, College of Medicine, Yeungnam Univ. 170, Hyeonchoong-ro, Nam-gu, Daegu 705-035, South Korea (4), Dept. of Dental Hygiene, Ulsan College, 101 Bongsu-ro, Dong-gu, Ulsan 682-715, South Korea (5), Gimcheon Medical Center, 24 Moam-gil, Gimcheon City, Gyeongsangbuk-do 740-010, South Korea (6)
Trend in colorectal cancer incidence in Chungnam province, South Korea (2000-2011) Nam Hae Sung and Kim Soon Young, Department of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, School of Medicine, Chungnam National University, Hospital/Chungnam National University, Daejeon, Korea, Republic Of Presenting author: Nam Hae Sung
Experience with radionuclide therapy for malignant tumors at a rural community hospital Okae Shunji, Matsushima Masaya, Kato Maki and Furuhashi Naohiro, Department of Radiology, Anjo Kosei Hospital, Anjo, Japan
Eliminating asbestos-related diseases in Albania Shamet Qejvani (1), Romeo Hanxhari (2), Melissa J. Perry (1), George Washington University, Washington DC, USA (1), University of Tirana, Tirana, Albania (2)

148
Cancer risk in rural areas Galapce M Saljamovska, Hospital respiratori disease -Oteshevo R Makedonia
Polymyalgia Rheumatica (PMR): Clinical, laboratory, and immunofluorescence findings in the elderly in Japan Shintani S, Kobayashi Z, Tomimitsu H. Department of Neurology, JA Toride Medical Center, Toride City, Ibaraki, Japan
Changes in elderly prostatic cancer patients: A single rural community hospital experience Takehiko Okamura, Hidetoshi Akita, Kenji Yamada, Yasuhiko Hirose, Takahiro Kobayashi, Yutaro Tanaka, Department of Urology, J.A. Aichi Anjo Kosei Hospital, Anjo, Japan
Regional Variation of Chronic Periodontal Care Services in South Korea Young Ju Yoon (1), Kyeong-Soo Lee (2), Tae Yoon Hwang (2), Chang-Suk Kim (3), Presenting author: Young Ju Yoon, Dept. of Dental Hygiene, Ulsan College, 101 Bongsu-ro, Dong-gu, Ulsan 682-715, South Korea, Dept. of Dental Hygiene, Ulsan College, 101 Bongsu-ro, Dong-gu, Ulsan 682-715, South Korea (1), Dept. of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, College of Medicine, Yeungnam Univ. 170 Hyeonchoong-ro, Nam-gu, Daegu 705-035, South Korea (2), Dept. of Dental Hygiene, Ulsan College, 101 Bongsu-ro, Dong-gu, Ulsan 682-715, South Korea (3)
Environmental and occupational risk assessment and prevention
From safety to productivity: an ergonomic study on milking activities Michele Addesa, Federica Masci, Claudio Colosio. Department of Health Sciences of the University of Milan and International Centre for Rural Health of the S. Paolo Hospital of Milano
Industrialized milking parlors operations: analysis of worker's wrist postures. AUTHORS: Faucon B. 1, Masci F. 2, Pasquereau P. 1, Colosio C. 1, Garigou A. 1, 1 IUT de Bordeaux Département HSE University of Bordeaux - Bordeaux - France, 2 Department of Health Sciences of the University of Milan and International Center for Rural Health of San Paolo Hospital, Milan - Italy
Matphyto program in France's overseas departments: crop exposure matrices for retrospective pesticides exposure assessment in the French West Indies and Reunion Island Gouy M (1), Gentil C (1), Chaperon L(2), Spinosi J (1), El Yamani M (1), French Institute for Public Health Surveillance, -, Fort de France, Martinique Umrestte, University Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Lyon, France (2)
ATV mortality in the United States, 2011-2013 Elise Lagerstrom M.S., David Gilkey, PhD., John Rosecrance, PhD., Sheryl Magzamen, PhD., Lorann Stallones, PhD. Colorado State University, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, United States
Pesticide exposure and health-risk profiles for re-entry activities in mountain vineyards Mattè M. (1), Rubino F.M. (2), Mandic-Rajcevic S. (3) and Colosio C. (3), Dipartimento di Prevenzione, Azienda Provinciale per i Servizi Sanitari, Trento, Italy (1), LaTMA Laboratory for Analytical Toxicology and Metabolomics, Department of Medicine, Surgery and Dental Sciences, University of Milan, San Paolo University Hospital, Milan, Italy (2), International Centre for Rural Health, San Paolo University Hospital, Milan, Italy (3)

149
Characterization of exposure to vibrations in different agricultural tractors Ninfa Monica Mucci (1), Michele Nuccio (1), Domenico Pessina (2), Davide Giordano (2), Alessandro Peretti (3), Francesco Bonomini (4), Federica Masci (1), Claudio Colosio (1). Department of Health Sciences of the University of Milan and International Centre for Rural Health of the S.Paolo Hospital of Milano (1), Department of Environmental and Agronomic Sciences of the University of Milan (2), Post Graduate School of Occupational Health, University of Padua (3), Free Engineer, Padua (4)
Characterization of noise in three different types of wheeled tractors Michele Nuccio (1) Ninfa Monica Mucci (1), Domenico Pessina (2),Davide Giordano (2), Marco Gibin (2), Federica Masci (1) , Claudio Colosio (1), 1 Department of Health Sciences of the University of Milan and International Center for Rural Health of San Paolo Hospital, Milan - Italy, 2 Department of Agronomic and Environmental Sciences, University of Milano
Toolbox talks: development of a dairy training curriculum Foos R (1), Rosecrance J (1), Rovai M (2), HICAHS, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, United States (1), HICAHS, South Dakota State University, Fort Collins, United States (2)
Assessment of noise annoyance on the workers in Olfin Factory, Mahshahr port, Iran Dr. Masoud Rafiei (1), Dr. Afshin Takdastan (2), Dr. Roksana Mirkazemi (3), Prisa Ghanberi (4), Member of Ahvaz Joundishapour University of Medical Sciences, (Retired), Ahvaz, Iran and Corresponding Author, rafiei_2001@yahoo.com (1), Member of Ahvaz Jundishapour University of Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran (2), Head of Hooman Research Institute, Tehran, Iran (3), M.Sc. of Environment pollution, research and sciences for Khuzestan Azad centre, Ahvaz, Iran (4)
Assessment of agricultural pesticide exposure by Pesticide Exposure Examination Survey among Korean agricultural workers Sangchul Roh (Center for farmer's health & safety, Dankook University Hospital), Shin Ah Kim (Center for farmer's health & safety, Dankook University Hospital), Jee Young Lee (Center for farmer's health & safety, Dankook University Hospital), Myung Seon Yeon (Center for farmer's health & safety, Dankook University Hospital), Hye Yoon Choi (Center for farmer's health & safety, Dankook University Hospital) Yunkeun Lee (Wonjin Institute for Occupational and Environmental Health), Jaeseok Song (Dep. Of preventive medicine, Catholic Kwandong University), Hongsoon Choi (Dep. Of preventive medicine, Catholic Kwandong University), Jeongbae Rhie (Center for farmer's health & safety, Dankook University Hospital)
Health and safety policies in rural areas
People's Attitude Toward Eating Habits and Health in Japanese Rural Area - Analysis of Survey Results and Their Commitment to Agriculture Tomihiro HAYAKAWA (1), Masashi SUGIURA (1), Sinya KOBAYASHI (1), Sachiko SUZUKI (1), Jiro IWASAKI (2), Akira HADA (3), Aichi Koseiren (prefectural federation of agricultural Cooperatives for health and welfare) Asuke Hospital, Aichi, Japan (1), Ibaraki Koseiren JA Toride Medical Center (2), Department of Public Health, Chiba University Graduate School of Medicine (3)

150
Legal, statutory and institutional framework of the management of pesticides in Benin: which impact on the users behaviors? Hinson A V, Dossou F, Lawn H, Ayelo P, Fayomi P, Unity of Teaching and Research in Occupational Health:, University of Abomey-Calavi, Cotonou, Benin
Mid-career change of medical doctors in Japan - Specialists to GeneralistKato Takuma (1) and Ikegami Naoki (2), Department of Global Health, Deputy Medical Director, School of Medicine, PhD candidate, Saku Central Hospital,Keio University, Keio University, Saku (1), Professor Emeritus, Keio University, Tokyo (2)
The possibility of verbal autopsy to clarify the causes of death in the HIV positive patients and to improve the services in rural setting in Zambia Kato Takuma, Department of Global Health, Saku Central Hospital, Saku
Differences in the number of elderly individuals newly certified to require long-term care between basic checklist respondents and non-respondents Katsura T (1), Fujimoto M (1), Shizawa M (2), Usui K (2), Hoshino A (2), GRADUATE SCHOOL OF MEDICINE DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN HEALTH SCIENCES, KYOTO UNIVERSITY, KYOTO, Japan (1), GRADUATE SCHOOL OF NURSING DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY HEALTH NURSING, KYOTO PREFECTURAL UNIVERSITY OF MEDICINE, KYOTO, Japan (2)
The status of safety and health in agriculture of South Korea Kyungsuk Lee, Hyeseon Chae, Hyocher Kim, Dept. of Agricultural Engineering, National Academy of Agricultural Science, RDA, Presenting author: Kyungsuk Lee, Dept. of Agricultural Engineering, National Academy of Agricultural Science, RDA 310 Nongsaengmyeong-ro, Wansan-gu, Jeonju-si,, Jellabuk-do, South Korea
A Health Promotion Strategy for Rapidly Aging Communities: The Activities of the Awata Health and Community Development Association's "Campaign for Improved Health" Miho Shizawa (1), (2), Akiko Hoshino (1), Kanae Usui (1), Mika Nishizawa(1), Megumi Fujimoto(2), Rikuya Hosokawa(2), Toshiki Katsura(2), KYOTO PREFECTURAL UNIVERSITY OF MEDICINE (1), KYOTO UNIVERSITY (2)
Improving the health of aged rural workers
Quality of Life of elderly people on a remote island: a comparison between urban and rural areas Hamano K., The Graduate School, St. Mary's College, 422 Tsubukuhonmachi Kurume Fukuoka Pref., Japan
Participatory Action Oriented Training for Improvement of Health and Safety of Korean Farmers Jin-Seok Kim, Seong-Yong Yoon, Seong-Yong Cho, Kuck-Hyun Woo, Dept. of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, Soonchunhyang University Gumi Hospital,South Korea, Presenting author: Jin-Seok Kim, Department of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, Soonchunhyang University Gumi Hospital, 179, Gongdan 1-dong, Gumi-si, Gyeongbuk, Korea

151
Gender Differences in the Occurrence of Nonfatal Agricultural Injuries among Farmers in Fukuoka, Japan Momose Y (1), Suenaga T (2), Faculty of Medicine, Fukuoka University, Fukuoka, Japan (1), Faculty of Medicine, Kurume University, Kurume, Japan (2)
Development and Application of Participatory Mapping for Healthy Agricultural Village Ki Soo Park, Jin Seok Kim, Department of Preventive Medicine, Gyeongsang National University, School of Medicine and Institute of Health Sciences, Jinju, Korea, Department of Occupational Medicine, Soonchunhyang University Gumi Hospital
Factors Affecting Four-year Score Change of Frailty, Depression, Cognitive Function and QOL in Rural Elderly: A Retrospective Study Seon Hee Kim (1), Kyeong-Soo Lee (2), Tae-Yoon Hwang (2), Chongsong-gun Public Health Center, Gyeongsanbuk-do Province, South Korea (1), Dept. of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, College of Medicine, Yeungnam Univ. 170 Hyeo choong-ro, Nam-gu, Daegu 705-035, South Korea (2), Presenting author: Kyeong-Soo Lee, Dept. of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, College of Medicine, Yeungnam Univ. 170 Hyeon choong-ro, Nam-gu, Daegu 705-035, South Korea
Alteplase (rt-PA) therapy in old Japanese patients with acute ischemic stroke Hiroyuki Tomimitsu, Kiyobumi Ohta, Zen Kobayashi, Shuzo Shintani, Department of Neurology, JA Toride Medical Center, Ibaraki, Japan
Muscle skeletal risk
Ergonomic analysis of work-related hazards in older farmers: a comparison between Sweden and Italy Caffaro F (1), Micheletti Cremasco M (2), Lundqvist, Nilsson K (3), Pinzke S (3), Göransson E (3), Cavallo E (1), CNR - Italian National Research Council, IMAMOTER - Institute for Agricultural and Earth-moving Machines, Turin, Italy (1), Department of Life Sciences and Systems Biology, University of Turin, Torino, Italy (2), Department of Work Science, Business Economics and Environmental Psychology, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Alnarp, Sweden (3)
Prevalence of Osteoporosis and related Factors using Quantitative Ultrasound among Korean Women Farm Workers Kim J H (1), Kim H D (2), Lee K S (3), Kim J G (2), Kim S Y (1), Choo H J (4), Kim H K (1), Lee S J (4), Lee C K (5) Son B C (5), Lee J T (5), Inje University Busan Paik Hospital Research Center for Fishery Safety and Health, Department of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, College of Medicine, Inje University, Busan, Korea, Republic Of (1), Inje University Busan Paik Hospital Research Center for Fishery Safety and Health, Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, College of Medicine, Inje University, Busan, Korea, Republic Of (2), National Academy of Agricultural Science, Rural Development Administration, Republic of Korea, National Academy of Agricultural Science, Rural Development Administration, Republic of Korea, Cheonju, Korea, Republic Of (3), Inje University Busan Paik Hospital Research Center for Fishery Safety and Health, Department of Radiology, College of Medicine, Inje University, Busan, Korea, Republic Of (4), Department of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, College of Medicine, Inje University, Busan, Republic Of Korea (5)
Study of posture during plowing operations. Analysis of the pressures to the seat Romano E., Cutini M., Bisaglia C.

152
A review of recent studies on the risk assessment from repetitive movements in agriculture Schillaci G., Camillieri D., Rapisarda V., Failla S., Caruso L., Romano E.
Risk Factors Associated with Lumbar and Femoral Bone Fractures in postmenopausal Japanese Women Yoshiaki Somekawa, Yusuke Kohri, Atsushi Fusegi, Takanori Yoshida, Mikiko Tsugata, Umeki Hidenori. Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Toride Medical Center, Toride, Japan
Internal fixation for displaced femoral neck fracture associated with poorly controlled diabetes mellitus Koji Suzuki.M.D., JA Toride Medical Center, JA Toride Medical Center, Ibaraki, Japan
Occupational risks assessment and prevention
Fine dust aerosols toxicokinetics in organism Ibrayeva L., Laboratory of environmental and occupational diseases, RSGE "National Center of Labor Hygiene and Occupational Diseases" of the Ministry of Healthcare and Social Development, Karaganda, Kazakhstan
Risk factors and children injuries while performing agricultural work in the Pozega-Slavonia County, Croatia Janev Holcer N (1), Brkic Bilos I (1), Mandic-Rajcevic S (2), Mustajbegovic J (3), Croatian Institute of Public Health, Croatian Institute of Public Health, Zagreb, Croatia (1), International Centre for Rural Health and Department of Health Sciences, San Paolo Hospital, University of Milan, Milan, Italy, School of Medicine, Andrija Stampar School of Public Health, WHO CC for Occupational Health, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia (3)
Rural-urban differences impact the number of unintentional injuries in elderly Korean adults Sun-A Kim(1), Su-Hyun Oh(1), Sun-Seog Kweon(1), Jin-Su Choi(1), Min-Ho Shin(1), Department of Preventive Medicine, Chonnam National University Medical School, Hak-1-dong, Dong-gu, Gwangju, 501-746, Republic of Korea (1)
Social capital among people with arthritis in Rural Area Ki Soo Park, Department of Preventive Medicine, Gyeongsang National University, School of Medicine and Institute of Health Sciences, Jinju, Korea
Policies and approaches for improving the access to health care in rural areas
Analysis of Medical Expenses Structure for Patients on Percutaneous Coronary Intervention by Medical Security Type Mi-Kyung, Son(1), Yong-Bae, Park(1), Sok-Goo, Lee(2), Division of Planning and Budget , ChungNam National University Hospital, Daejeon, South Korea (1) Department of Preventive Medicine and Public health, Chungnam National University School of Medicine, Daejeon, South Korea (2)
Current situation of severe motor and intellectual disabilities in a rural area, the Saku region of Nagano Prefecture Hosoya M, Nagano Prefectural Federation of Agricultural Cooperatives for Health and Welfare, Saku Central Hospital Advanced Care Center, 3400-28 Saku City, Nagano Pref., 385-0051, Japan

153
Examination of support needed to continue home care in the community (1): Differences in occupations and training of staff involved in home care Takako Tsukahara (1), Kimiko Mizukami (2), Hiroyuki Beniya (3), Kawasaki University of Medical Welfare, University, kurashiki city, Japan (1), Jin-ai University, University, Echizen city, Japan (2), Orange Home Care Clinic, Hospital, fukui city, Japan (3)
Examination of support needed to continue home care in the community (2): Creating a Scale of Difficulty in Continuing Home Care Kimiko Mizukami (1), Takako Tsukahara (2) , Hiroyuki Beniya (3), Jin-ai University, University, Echizen city, Japan (1), Kawasaki University of Medical Welfare, University, kurashiki city, Japan (2), Orange Home Care Clinic, Hospital, fukui city, Japan (3)
Relationship between Bone Mineral Density and Remaining Teeth and Its Related Physiological Factors in Postmenopausal Women Chang-Suk Kim (1), Kyeong-Soo Lee (2), Tae Yoon Hwang (2), Dept. of Dental Hygiene, Ulsan College, 101 Bongsu-ro, Dong-gu, Ulsan 682-715, South Korea (1), Dept. of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, College of Medicine, Yeungnam Univ. 170 Hyeonchoong-ro, Nam-gu, Daegu 705-035, South Korea (2), Presenting author: Chang-Suk Kim, Dept. of Dental Hygiene, Ulsan College, 101 Bongsu-ro, Dong-gu, Ulsan 682-715, South Korea

154
The NEW Lodi Declaration on Rural Health
Adopted by the International Congress on Rural Health (ICRH)
and the 4th International Conference Ragusa Safety Health Welfare in
Agriculture Agro-Food and Forestry Systems (Ragusa SHWA)

155
Whereas more than 50% of the world's population live in rural areas, with limited or no access to primary health care, basic occupational health care, clean water and sanitation,
Whereas unsustainable and unhealthy agricultural practices have influence on the rural population, with potential severe influence on the environment, wildlife, and urban population, through contaminated soil, water and food,
Whereas structural system-related determinants accompanied by unsafe work behaviours causes occupational and work-related diseases and injuries, disabilities, premature deaths, loss of income, as well as human suffering and poverty in rural areas,
Whereas children and women working in agriculture are especially vulnerable to occupational and environmental risks, in addition to consequences arising from the unavailability of basic health service and inadequate housing, in particular from household fuel combustion,
Whereas international, national and local actions, although significant and honourable, have not been able to respond successfully to all the challenges put before them,
Underlining that the achievement of the highest possible level of health for all people is impossible without improving the health of the rural population, and this is impossible without the involvement of the public sector as a whole,
Taking into consideration the Declaration of the International Conference on Primary Health Care, Alma-Ata, USSR, 1978, the Global Strategy on Occupational Health for All adopted by the World Health Assembly with Resolution 49.12 from 1996 and the Global Strategy on Occupational Safety and Health adopted by the International Labour Conference in 2003, the Safety and Health in Agriculture Convention, 2001 (No. 184) of the International Labour Organisation.

156
Recalling the outcomes of previous international deliberations on occupational health in agriculture and rural health, such as the Declaration of the First International Congress on Rural Health in the Mediterranean and Balkan Countries (Bari, Italy, 2002), the Agenda on Rural Health (Loni, India, 2002), the Declaration on Occupational and Environmental Rural Health (Belgrade, Serbia, 2004), the Lodi Declaration on Healthy Villages (Lodi, Italy, 2006), the Cartagena Declaration on Rural Health in Latin America (Cartagena de Indias, Colombia, 2009), and the Goa Declaration for Health in the Global Village (Panaji, Goa, India, 2012),
Recalling the continuing appeal of spiritual and secular leaders and of scholars and scientists worldwide to a responsible stewardship of the Planet, to a shared and sustainable access to its natural and limited resources, to their preservation for future generations,
We, the 250 participants from 52 countries from all continents who took part in the International Congress on Rural Health and 4th Ragusa SHWA, held here in Lodi, Italy, from September 8th to September 11th, 2015, discussed the challenges to providing adequate occupational and environmental health, food safety, public health and medical services in rural areas, and
WE DECLARE THAT:
1. We will commit ourselves to help solving occupational, environmental and public health problems and inadequacies in access to health care in rural areas, in the frame of the WHO global strategy on people centred and integrated health service;
2. We will advocate for the elimination of child labour in rural and remote areas, recognition of informal and migrant agricultural workers, and abolishment of modern slavery;
3. We call for national and international organizations, as well as individuals to work on the improvement of the scope and coverage

157
of primary health care to address better the needs of rural communities inclusive needs related to health and safety at work such as agrochemical use, heavy physical work, accidents, heat stress, dehydration and kidney injuries, cancer due to solar radiation, biological risk factors and zoonoses;
4. We will work towards providing higher access of workers to occupational health care with the creation of basic occupational health services in rural areas wherever necessary,
5. We recognize the need for addressing occupational, environmental and public health risks in rural areas by working together with all of the stakeholders, governments, public sector a while, and industry, as well as the ministries of health, environment, labour, agriculture and other state agencies, private enterprises and workers' organizations;
6. We underline the significance of local, regional, national and international initiatives to protect and promote the health of the rural population;
7. We encourage the following organizations: The European Rural and Isolated Practitioners Association (EURIPA), The International Association on Rural Medicine and Health (IARM), the International Commission on Occupational Health (ICOH), the WONCA Working Party on Rural Practice, as well as the organizations of farmers, agricultural workers, agricultural industry, and the relevant non-governmental organizations and networks, to take action to support and promote the development of Rural Health programmes;
8. We will dedicate a significant part of our scientific and professional efforts to create useful, accessible, simple and low-cost tools for occupational, indoor and environmental risk assessment, communication and management;
9. We call upon the governmental agencies and local authorities to ensure equal and proper access of people in villages, to information

158
on public and occupational health and the environment, stimulate social and environmental justice, as well as to provide means for empowerment of rural populations to protect and promote their health, and to improve their working and living conditions. Access to health care should be treated as a basic human right. Use of ehealth and telemedicine should be promoted in rural area;
10. We congratulate our colleagues which have been working on opening reference centres at the local, national and international level for providing expertise and support to the rural population;
11. We call for the creation of interdisciplinary teams of experts from the field of human and veterinary medicine, public, occupational, and environmental health, health promotion, food safety, chemical safety, agricultural, social and human sciences, and agricultural engineering which will address the needs of the rural population;
12. We recommend introducing Occupational Health and Safety concerns in training and educational programmes in all of the abovementioned disciplines at any level, from health care providers to rural workers and population, in order to build the necessary human resources and to provide services of great quality to the rural population and agricultural workers. Specific country needs and participatory approach should be addressed;
13. We urge the agricultural sector to realize its responsibility for healthy working and housing conditions by expanding suitable measures for workers and farms and by providing financial means for scientific and educational developments to support such measures;
14. We are committed to share our practice and experience in devising, implementing and evaluating educational programs for the improvement of the health of the rural population;
15. We are committed, as citizens, to advocate peace and justice, and the pursuit of the common good as the founding of scientific and professional achievement in our own field of expertise;

159
We hereby authorize the Congress Presidents, the EURIPA, IARM, ICOH and WONCA Working Party on Rural Practice representatives to sign this declaration on our behalf.
Submitted to the Assembly by Stefan Mandic-Rajcevic (Italy and Serbia)
Signed in Lodi, September 11th 2015
Claudio Colosio, ICRH President Giampaolo Schillaci, Ragusa SHWA President Tanja Pekez Pavlisko, President, EURIPA; Vice Chair WONCA Working Party on Rural Practice, Hans Joaquin Hannich, President, IARM and Shuzo Shintani, Secretary General, IARM Jukka Takala, President, ICOH and Gert van der Laan, Chair, the ICOH Scientific Committee on Rural Health , ICOH

