processes
Article
Big Data Analytics for Smart Manufacturing: Case Studies in Semiconductor Manufacturing
James Moyne * and Jimmy Iskandar
Applied Materials, Applied Global Services, 363 Robyn Drive, Canton, MI 48187, USA; Jimmy_Iskandar@amat.com * Correspondence: moyne@umich.edu; Tel.: +1-734-516-5572
Received: 6 June 2017; Accepted: 4 July 2017; Published: 12 July 2017
Abstract: Smart manufacturing (SM) is a term generally applied to the improvement in manufacturing operations through integration of systems, linking of physical and cyber capabilities, and taking advantage of information including leveraging the big data evolution. SM adoption has been occurring unevenly across industries, thus there is an opportunity to look to other industries to determine solution and roadmap paths for industries such as biochemistry or biology. The big data evolution affords an opportunity for managing significantly larger amounts of information and acting on it with analytics for improved diagnostics and prognostics. The analytics approaches can be defined in terms of dimensions to understand their requirements and capabilities, and to determine technology gaps. The semiconductor manufacturing industry has been taking advantage of the big data and analytics evolution by improving existing capabilities such as fault detection, and supporting new capabilities such as predictive maintenance. For most of these capabilities: (1) data quality is the most important big data factor in delivering high quality solutions; and (2) incorporating subject matter expertise in analytics is often required for realizing effective on-line manufacturing solutions. In the future, an improved big data environment incorporating smart manufacturing concepts such as digital twin will further enable analytics; however, it is anticipated that the need for incorporating subject matter expertise in solution design will remain.
Keywords: big data; smart manufacturing; predictive analytics; anomaly detection; process control; predictive maintenance; semiconductor manufacturing

1. Introduction
Smart manufacturing (SM) is a term generally applied to a movement in manufacturing practices towards integration up and down the supply chain, integration of physical and cyber capabilities, and taking advantage of advanced information for increased flexibility and adaptability [1,2]. It is often equated with "Industry 4.0", a term that originated from a project in the German government that promotes a 4th generation of manufacturing that uses concepts such as cyber-physical systems, virtual copies of real equipment and processes, and decentralized decision making to create a smart factory [3­5].
SM leverages a corresponding trend in manufacturing of the advances in volume, velocity, and variety of data, often referred to as "big data," and applies "big data analytics" to improve existing analysis capabilities and provide new capabilities such as predictive analytics [6]. These capabilities are emerging in all industries, but at different speeds probably due to factors such as installed base, culture, supplier base, and need. Thus, the potential exists to look across industries to understand what can be used to improve the capabilities in a particular industry such as biochemistry and biology [6­8].
In this paper, recent advancements in SM big data analytics in the semiconductor manufacturing industry are explored so that capabilities can be assessed for use in the biochemistry and related

Processes 2017, 5, 39; doi:10.3390/pr5030039

www.mdpi.com/journal/processes

Processes 2017, 5, 39

2 of 20

industries. Specifically, in the following section, the semiconductor industry is described with respect to the history of factory operation analytics, the emergence of SM, and the roadmap for application of big data analytics. Analytics approaches in semiconductor manufacturing are then profiled from a perspective of challenges that govern analytics development in a manufacturing sector, a taxonomy for understanding analytics capabilities, the current state-of-the-art, and an analytics roadmap for supporting SM concepts. Case study applications are then presented that illustrate the capabilities that the analytics approaches provide as well as the trends in SM that they support. This paper concludes with a discussion of underlying themes that are guiding big data analytics development in semiconductor manufacturing; it is proposed that these themes might resonate in biochemistry and related industries. Supplementary materials are provided including a list of abbreviations used in the paper and references to many of the analytics approaches and analytical solutions.
2. Background
2.1. Semiconductor Manufacturing and the Emergence of On-Line Analytics
Semiconductor manufacturing is part of a larger manufacturing discipline often referred to as microelectronics manufacturing. In semiconductor manufacturing, semiconductor "wafers" are processed in a fabrication facility or "fab" using hundreds of film deposition, pattering and etching steps focused on defining features at the angstrom level in repeated patterns on the wafer called "die". These "front-end" processes are revisited so that multiple layers are constructed. Once front-end processing is completed, "back-end" processing uses assembly, test and packaging capabilities to complete the process of converting individual die to "chips". Providing front-end processing capabilities requires a clean room environment and complex equipment, with each machine costing >$1M (USD) and containing hundreds of components and thousands of failure points at minimum [9,10].
Semiconductor manufacturers must address a number of high level production challenges to remain profitable in a very competitive global environment. Yield across the entire line usually must be very high (e.g., >90%, which often translates to >99% at each process step) and, given the dynamics of the production environment, there must be a continuous yield learning process in place to keep the yield at high levels. New products must be brought up to high yield quickly as the profit margins of these new products are often a major source of profit in the industry. As such, rapid yield ramp-up is a challenge. Waste reduction must also be addressed in terms of product scrap, lost production due to high cycle and non-production times, environmental waste, and general capital waste due to factors such as poor use of consumables and poor planning. Finally, semiconductor facilities generally operate at near capacity, so throughput optimization is critical.
In addressing these challenges a family of factory operation analytics called advanced process control (APC) quickly came to the forefront in the 1990s as a tool for competitive advantage and then as a requirement in the early 2000s (see Figure 1) [6,11­15]. Over the first decade of the 2000s APC capabilities such as on-line equipment and process fault detection (FD) and classification (FDC), and process control (referred to as "run-to-run" or "R2R" control) became pervasive in all front-end semiconductor manufacturing facilities. Due largely to the complexity of the processes (e.g., operational states and number of components) as well as the business climate of suppliers, and industry roadmaps and standards, these solutions leveraged fab-wide data collection and analysis approaches. They also used configurable control workflows to provide flexibility and re-configurability which allowed solutions to address needs such as process-to-process variability, high product mixes, and process dynamics [14,15].

Processes 2017, 5, 39 Processes 2017, 5, 39

3 of 20 3 of 20

FFiigguurree 11.. HHiissttoorryy ooff pprroocceessss aannaallyyttiiccss iinn sseemmiiccoonndduuccttoorr mmaannuuffaaccttuurriinngg.. DDaatteess aarree aapppprrooxxiimmaattee aanndd ddeetteerrmmiinneeddfrformomanaannaalynsailsyosfispuobflipcautbiolincsaitnioAnsdvianncAeddvParnocceesds CPoronctreoslsCConofnetrreonlceCso, wnfiethrepnecrems,iswsioitnh fproermm[i6ss,1io2n], Cfroopmy[r6ig,1h2t]A, CdovpaynrciegdhtPArodcvesasnCceodnPtrroolcCesosnCfeorenntrcoelsC2o01n6fe. rences 2016.
22..22.. TThhee BBiigg DDaattaa RReevvoolluuttiioonn aanndd AAssssoocciiaatteedd CChhaalllleennggeess
AAss ththeeinidnudsutsrytrypropgroregsrseesdseidntointthoe stheceonsedcdonecdaddeeocaf dthee onfewthme inlleewnnimumill,eannniuummb,eraonf uinmflbeectrioonf pinofilnetcstiobnegpaonintots dbreigvaenatonedxrtivgeenaernaetxiot ngeonfearantailoynticosf. anFairlsytt,icdse. vFiicrest,codmevpilceexictoymbpelgeaxnitytoberegqaunirteo rreevqouliuretiornevs oinlumtioannsufianctmurainnugfpacrotucreisnsgesp. rAosceesxsaems.pAless,edxeavmicpelsesw, edreevnicoews bweeinreg ndoewsigbneeidngfrodmesiag3n-eDd rfarothmerath3a-Dn 2r-aDthpeerrtshpaenct2iv-De, panedrsnpeewctidveev, iacnedtencehwnodloegviiecsestuecchhnaoslFoigniFeEs Tsu(fichn afiselFdi-neFffEeTct(tfriannfsiiesltdo-re[f1fe6c])t wtrearnesbisetionrg[c1o6n])cewiveerde [b1e7i,n1g8]c. oSnecceoinvde,dne[1w7,m18a]r.kSeetcdornivde, rnseawccemlearrakteetddthrievneersedacfocerlfearsatteerd, smthaellneer,emd ofroer cfoasmteprl,esxmaanldlelro,wmeorrpeocwomerpdleevxiacensd; tlhoewseerdpriovweresridneclvuidceest;hteheInsetedrnrievteorfs Tinhcinlugdse(ItohTe, Iwnhteerrneeat voafrTiehtiyngofs d(IiossTi,mwilhaerrdeeavivcaersieatrye coofndnisescitmediloarvedretvhieceIsntaerrenceot)n, ntheecteexdpolovseironthoef Imntoebrinleetd),etvhieceesx, pnleowsiotenchonf omloogbiielse sduecvhicaess,snmeawrttveechhnicolelosg, aiensdsutecchhnasolsomgiaerst avseshoiccilaetse,danwditthecthheno"lboiggiedsaatas"soecxiaptleodsiownitshutchhea"sbaigrtidfiactiaa"l ienxtpellolisgieonncseu(cAhI)a.sTahrtiisfilcaisatl idnrtievlelirgeanlscoe r(eApIr).esTehnitsslaasnt dimripvoerrtaalnsto irneflpercetsieonntspaoninitmipnosretamnitcoinnfdleucctitoonr mpoainnut fainctusreimngicoopnedruactitoonrs,mnaanmueflaycttuhreinegmeorpgeernacteioonfsb, ignadmatealyantdheitseamsseorgcieantecde coafpabbigilitdyattoa saunpdpoirtts iamssporcoivateeddacnaaplaybtiiclsityontothseupfapcotortryimflporoorv. ed analytics on the factory floor.
TThheeroroaaddmmaappfofrotrhetheemeemrgeerngceenocfeboigf dbaigta dinastaeminicosnemduiccotonrdmucatnourfamctaunruinfagcotupreirnagtioonpseirsaatciotunaslliys daectfiunaeldlyindetefirnmeds oinf "t5erVms"s:oVfo"lu5mVes,"V: Veloolcuitmy,eV, aVrieeltoyci(toyr, dVaatraiemtyer(goirngd)a,tVaemraecritgyin(ogr),dVaetaraqcuitayli(toyr),daantda Vqaulauleity(o),r aapnpdlicVaatliuone o(of ranaaplyptliiccsa)ti[o1n9­o21f ].anAaslyshtiocsw)n[1in9­F2i1g]u. rAe 2s, sfahbo-wwnidiendaFtiaguvroelu2m, efsaba-rwe gidreowdiantga avtoeluxpmoenseanrteiagl rroawteisn. gPeartveaxspivoenednattiaalvrealotecsit.iPesermvaesaisvuereddataasvtheleodciatiteascmoleleacstuiorendraatsesthoeffdoaftaeqcuoilplemcteionnt arcartoesssotfhfeoffaebqhuaipvme iennctreaacsreodssfrtohme flaebsshtahvaeni1ncHrezaisnedthfero19m90lsestsot1h0aHn z1 tHodzaiyn athned1a9r9e0psrotoje1c0teHd ztotobdeaayt 1a0n0dHazreinparofejewctyedeatros wbeitahts1o0m0eHdzedinicaatfeedwseynesaorrsdwatitahcosollmecetiodnedraictaesteidn esexncessosrodfa1t0aKcoHllze.cWtioitnhrraetsepseicnt teoxdceastsa voafri1e0tyK, dHatza. sWtoirtehs frreosmpeecqtutiopmdaentat tvraacreiedtya,tadtahtraousgtohremseftrroolmogey,qmuiapimnteennat ntcrea,cyeiedladt,aintvhernotuogryh mmaentraogloemgye,nmt,aminatnenuafanccteu,ryinieglde,xiencvuetniotonrsyymstaenmag(MemEeSn) ta,nmdaennutfearcptruirsienrgeesoxeucrucetiopnlasnynsitnegm(E(MRPE)S)haanvde eexnitsetrepdrfioser orveesor uardceecapdlaen; hnoinwgev(EerR, Pan) ahlyavtiecseaxriestneodwfwororokvienrg atodleevceardaeg;ehaonwdemveerrg, eanmaulylttiipclse astroerensotwo ewxoprlokrine greltaotiolenvsehriapgse, daentedctmaneorgmealmieus,ltainpdlepsretodriects etvoenetxsp. lDoareta rqeulaatliiotyn(svheiprasc,itdye)theacst baeneonmreaclioegsn, iaznedd apsrebdigicdt aetvae"nVts". oDfamtaosqtuiamliptyor(tvanercaecpitrye)vhenastinbgeetnherweciodgensipzreedadasadboigptidoantaof"bVi"g dofatma aonstaliymtipcsoritnanthcee ipnrdeuvsetnrtyi.ngIssthueeswsiudcehsparseaadccuadraocpyt,ioconmofplbeitgendeastsa, acnoanltyetxitcsriicnhntheessi,nadvuasitlrayb.ilIistsyu, easndsuacrhchaisvaaclcluenragctyh, hcoamvepalelltebneeesns,idceonnttiefixetdraicshanreesass, wavhaeirlaebtihlietyin, daunsdtrayrcnheievdasl tloenimgtphrohvaveedaatlal bqeueanlitiydetontsiufipedpoarst tahreesaes awdhvearnecethdeainnadluytsitcrsy. nWeietdhsretospiemctptroovvealduaet,athqeubailgitydatotaseuvpopluortitotnhehsaesaednvaabnlecdedimapnraolyvteimcse. nWt iintherxeissptiencgt atonavlayltuices, athpeplbiicgatdioantas eavsowluetliloans hthaes eemnaebrlgeednicme pofronveewmaepnpt liincaetxioisntisn, gboatnhaolyftwicshiacphpwlicilaltbioenesxapslowreedll tahsrtohuegehmeexragmenpcleesolfanteerwinapthpilsicpaatipoenrs.,Tbhoethinodf uwshtriychhwasilml baedeexapcloornecderthterdouegffhoretxianmbpoltehs ildateenrtiinfytihnigs aparpoaedr.mTahpefoinrdnuesetdryedhiamspmroavdeemeantcsontocesrutepdpoerftfobritg idnatbaoatnhaliydteincstifaynidngspaecrifoyaidnmg asptanfdorardnesetdheadt pimropvriodveeammenetths otdo fsourpcpoomrtmbuignicdaattiangananaldytviecsrifaynindgsbpiegcidfyatinagresqtuainrdemarednststhaantdpcraopvaidbielitaiems [e1t9h­o2d3]f.or
communicating and verifying big data requirements and capabilities [19­23].

PrPorcoecsessesse2s 021071,75, ,53, 939

4 4ofo2f 020

Figure 2. The big data explosion in semiconductor manufacturing, presented in [17], with permission frFoimgu[r1e72].. TChoepbyigridgahttaAexdpvlaonsicoendinPrsoecmesicsoCndonutcrtoolr Cmoannfuefraecntcuer,in2g0,1p6r.esTehneteddiifnfe[r1e7n]t, wcoitlohrpserremfeisrstioon thfreopmrim[1a7r].yCporpocyersigshtyt pAedsvianntcheedsPemroicceosnsdCuocntotrro"lfCabo"n,fneraemnceely, 2e0tc1h6,. lTithheogdrifafpehreyn, tdceoploosristiroenfe, rdetofetcht e inpsrpimecatiroyn parnodceostshetrympeestrionlotghye, asnedmoictohnerdsu. ctor "fab", namely etch, lithography, deposition, defect
inspection and other metrology, and others.
2.3. Big Data Enabled APC Capabilities 2.3. Big Data Enabled APC Capabilities The big data evolution has resulted in the ability to improve existing capabilities that are pervasive
in semTichoenbdiugctdoartma aenvuofluactitounrinhga,sbruetsaullstoedtoirneatlhizeeanbeilwitycatpoabimiliptireosv, esuecxhisatsinpgrecdaipcatibvielitciaepsatbhialittieasre thpaetrrveaqsuivireeitnheseimmipcroonvdeudct"oVrsm" taonpurfaocvtiudreinegff,ebctuitvealssoolutotiorneasl.izTehenseewimcapproavbeilditiaens,dsnuecwh acsapparbeidliitciteisv,e sucampmabairliiztieeds itnhaTtarbelqeu1i,raertehceoinmsipdreorveeddto"Vbse"ptaortporof vthideeexetfefencdtievdeAsoPlCutfiaomnsi.lyT.hAemseoinmgptrhoevmed, FaDn,dSnPeCw ancadpRa2bRilictioenst,rsoul marme pareirzveadsiivne Tinabelxeis1ti,nagrefacbosnasniddeEreHdMtoisbfeaipralyrtcoomf tmheonepxtleanced;eFdDAaPnCd EfaHmMilym. eAthmoodnsg artheeemxp, eFcDte, dSPtoCbaenidmRp2rRovceodntarsolaarreesupletrovfasbiivgedinataexaidstvinagncfeasb.sIasonldatEeHd MsuciscefsasirelsyincoPmdmMo,nVpMlac, ea;nFdD parenddicEtiHveMscmheetdhuoldinsgahreaveexpbeecetnedretpoobrteedim; hporowveevdera,schaarlelesnuglteosfstbiilgl edxaistat. aYdievladnpceresd. Iicsotiloanterdemsuacincessasses aifnutPudrMe e, fVfoMrt,hainnddeprereddliacrtigveelyscbhyeddautlainqguhalaivtye ibsesuenesr.eEpxotretnedd;edhoFwDeCvearn,dchPadllMencgaepsasbtiilliltieexsiswt.ilYl ibeeld expprelodriecdtiolanterreminatihniss pasapaerfutotuirlleuestfrfoatret hhoinwdethreedbilgardgaetlayebvyolduatitoanqius alelivtyeraisgseude.s. Extended FDC and
PdM capabilities will be explored later in this paper to illustrate how the big data evolution is 2.l4e.vLereavgereadg.ing Lessons-Learned to Other Industries
2.4. ALesvneroatgedinginLSeesscotinosn-L1e,atrhneedpototeOntthiaelreIxnidsutssttroielsook to the semiconductor manufacturing industry to improve the capabilities in other industries such as biochemistry and biology. As will be shown in SectionA3s,nthoitsedapipnrSoeaccthioisne1s,ptehceiaplloyteanptpialilceaxbilsettsotoinldouosktrtioesthoer isnedmuisctoryndfauccettosrthmaatnaurefacchtaurraicntgeriinzdedusbtyry qtuoaliimtiepsrosuvechthaes:c(a1p)atbhielintieeesdinfoorthpererciinsdiounstmriaens usufacchtuarsinbgio; c(2h)ecmoissttrpyreasnsdurbeisorleoqguyi.rAinsgwrailplibdersahmopw-nupin oSf encetwionte3c,htnhoisloagpipersoaancdh cisoenstpineucioaullsyiamppprloicvaebmleetnot;in(3d)ucsotrmiepsloexr iitnydiunsptrryofcaecsestesstahnadt aorfetecnhtairmacetselraizcekd obf yprqoucaelsistievsissibuiclhitya;s:an(1d) (t4h)ednyeneadmfiocrs pinrepcirsoiocenssmesa.nuTfhaectuabriinligty; (t2o) lceovsetrapgreessthueressorlueqtiuoinrisnigs raalspoid imrapmropv-uedp iof fthneeawutotemchantioolnogaineds danatda mcoanntiangueomuesntimcapproavbielmitieensta; r(e3)simcoimlarp.leFxoitryexinampprloec,etshseesdaatnad voolfutemnteism, veeslolacictkieso,fanpdroqcueasslitvyisshiboiuliltdy;beansudffi(4ci)endtytnoasmupicpsoirnt thperoecxeescsuetsi.onThofethaebialintaylyttoicsletvoeprarogveidthee qsuoalluittyiosnosluistioanlsso, ainmdptrhoeveadutiofmthaetioanutsohmouatlidonbeasnudffidcaietantmtoanimagpelmemenetntcacopnabtrioliltiaecstiaornes saismsoilcaira.teFdor weixthamthpelsee, stholeudtiaotnas.volumes, velocities, and quality should be sufficient to support the execution of
the analytics to provide quality solutions, and the automation should be sufficient to implement 3.coAnntraolyl taicctsioAnpsparsosaocchiaetsedinwSiethmtihceosnedsuocltuotrioMnsa.nufacturing
3.31..ASnemaliycotincdsuActporpIrnodauchstersy iSnpeSceifimciCcohanldleuncgteosrImMpaanctuinfagcAtunrainlygtics
The emergence and evolution of equipment and process analytics for semiconductor m3a.1n.uSfeamctiucroinndguhctaosrbIenednusdtrriyveSnpebcyifitchCe hoabljleecntgivesesImoupatlcitninedg iAnnSaelcyttiiocsn 2.1, but also by three key challenges
that exTishteinetmheersgemenicceondanudctorevinodluutsitorny; tohfeseeqcuhiapllmenegnets hanavde epxrioscteedssinatnhaeliyntdicusstfroyrfosredmecicaodneds uacntdor armeannout fsapcetcuirfiinc gtohSaMs obreethne dbrigivdeantabryevtohleutoiobnje;chtiovwesevoeur,ttlhineeydariensSoemcetiwonha2t.u1,nibquute atolssoembyicothnrdeuectkoery mcahnaullfeancgtuersinthgaatnedxitshteirneftohreeskeemyictoonddefiunctionrgiandrouasdtrmy;atphfeosreicmhpallelemnegnetsinhgavSeMexciosntecdepitns tihnethinedinudstursytrfyo.r Tdheecafidrsets cahnadllaernegneoitsspeqecuiifpicmtoenStManodr thperobciegsds actoamrepvloelxuittyio. nA; hsonwoetveedr,etahrelyiear,reeascohmseewmhiactounndiuqcuteorto
semiconductor manufacturing and therefore key to defining a roadmap for implementing SM

Processes 2017, 5, 39

5 of 20

front-end equipment costs upwards of $1M (USD) with hundreds of components and thousands of failure points at minimum. The detailed process happenings often cannot be defined succinctly with chemical or physics equations, a significant number of interactions between components exist, long data archives are needed to capture and characterize all forms of events (such as downtimes) and event interactions, and there are a large number of unknowns or unmeasured quantities complicating the characterization of the operation of the equipment and process.

Table 1. Definitions of Advanced Process Control (APC) and APC extended capabilities.

Technology

Definition

Advanced Process Control (APC)

The manufacturing discipline for applying control strategies and/or employing analysis and computation mechanisms to recommend
optimized machine settings and detect faults and determine their cause.

APC Base Technologies as Defined in [24]

Fault Detection (FD)

The technique of monitoring and analyzing variations in tool and/or process data to detect anomalies. FD includes both univariate (UVA)
and multivariate (MVA) statistical analysis techniques.

Fault Classification (FC)

The technique of determining the cause of a fault once it has been detected.

Fault Detection and Classification (FDC)

A combination of FD and FC.

Fault Prediction (or prognosis) (FP)

The technique of monitoring and analyzing variations in process data to predict anomalies.

Run-to-Run (R2R) Control

The technique of modifying recipe parameters or the selection of control parameters between runs to improve processing performance. A "run"
can be a batch, lot, or an individual wafer.

Statistical Process Control (SPC)

The technique of using statistical methods to analyze process or product metrics to take appropriate actions to achieve and maintain a state of statistical control and continuously improve the process capability.

APC Extended Technologies as Defined in [19,20]

Equipment Health Monitoring (EHM)

The technology of monitoring tool parameters to assess the tool health as a function of deviation from normal behavior. EHM is not necessarily
predictive in nature, but is often a component of predictive systems.

Predictive Maintenance (PdM)

The technology of utilizing process and equipment state information to predict when a tool or a particular component in a tool might need maintenance, and then utilizing this prediction as information to improve maintenance procedures. This could mean predicting and
avoiding unplanned downtimes and/or relaxing un-planned downtime schedules by replacing schedules with predictions. PdM solutions as defined herein address the entire maintenance cycle, from predicting maintenance through addressing recovery from maintenance events towards returning to production.

Predictive Scheduling

The technology of utilizing current and projected future information on tool and factory state, capabilities, WIP, schedule, dispatch and orders to
predict and improve scheduling of a system (tool, group of tools, fab, etc.).

Virtual Metrology (VM)

The technology of prediction of post process metrology variables (either measurable or not measurable) using process and wafer state
information that could include upstream metrology and/or sensor data. Terms such as virtual sensing and sensor fusion have also been used to
represent this capability.

Yield Prediction

The technology of monitoring information across the fab (e.g., tool and metrology) to predict process or end of line yield.

The second challenge is process dynamics. Most semiconductor processes are characterized by significant process dynamics that result in drift or shift of process operation. The dynamics can be due to internal process and equipment factors such a chamber "seasoning" over time or gradual depletion

Processes 2017, 5, 39

6 of 20

of a consumable, or external factors that change the "context" of operation such as maintenance events and frequent changes in products.
The third challenge is data quality. As noted earlier data quality issues ranging from accuracy to availability to context richness continue to exist. While data quality continues to improve and is arguably better than in many other industries, due to factors such as stringent processing requirements and adherence to standards, data still cannot be blindly trusted in analytical solutions [6].
These challenges have resulted in the realization that analytics solutions for the semiconductor industry cannot be strictly data driven. In other words, tool process and analytics domain or subject matter expertise (SME) is a critical component of most fab analytical solutions. Process analytics in the industry are designed and employed with this in mind. Often the mechanism for SME input is formally defined in areas including data collection, data treatment, parameter selection, model building, model and limits optimization, and solution deployment and maintenance.
3.2. Dimensions of Analytics Capabilities
There has been an explosion in analytical approaches over the last decade with many of these analytics developed to take advantage of the big data explosion. One way to identify and categorize these analytics is by defining dimensions of capability in analysis and specifying or plotting analysis capabilities with respect to these dimensions. One perspective of defining a taxonomy for organizing analytics is described in [25]. Figure 3 provides a breakdown of dimensions relevant to analytics in semiconductor manufacturing, with the dimension descriptions as follows [6]:
· Level of Supervision: This dimension can be thought of as the level of input-output data correlation that the analytic seeks to provide between datasets. In purely unsupervised scenarios, analytics generally operate on a single dataset with no direct objective of correlation to other data sets. A good example is traditional FD, which is actually anomaly detection. Equipment data is analyzed to determine if there is an anomaly in which parameters are anomalous (e.g., out of range). Some EHM applications are also unsupervised. At the other extreme, analytics can focus on determining correlations between "input" and "output" datasets [26,27]. As an example, PdM and VM determine relationships between equipment data (trace or processed, e.g., through FD) and maintenance and metrology measurement data, respectively. Between the two of these are a variety of semi-supervised scenarios in which supervised data may be used strictly for model training, or the input data set is associated with labels such as "good" or "bad" providing a level of supervision.
· Level of Prediction: This dimension identifies the ability of the analytic to forecast or predict outputs. At one end, analytics can be purely reactive, detecting an event after it has happened. Good examples are traditional fault detection and data mining, in which the analytic provides information based on the understanding that the event has already occurred. At the other end of the spectrum are purely predictive analytics such as PdM where an event is forecasted before it occurs. Note that predictions are usually accompanied by some indication of prediction horizon or time-to-failure and an indication of quality or range of prediction; this is explored further in Section 4.2. Between purely reactive and purely predictive are a number of somewhat predictive capabilities. A good example is trend-based analysis where a generally reactive monitoring capability is analyzed with respect to trends that are extrapolated to anticipate a future event.
· Level of Correlation Among Parameters Analyzed: This dimension defines how the variables are analyzed with respect to each other in a dataset. At one end we have purely univariate (UVA) analysis in which each parameter is analyzed individually. A large number of FD solutions leverage UVA analysis. Note that this does not mean that parameters are not correlated; it just means that the analysis technique does not explore this correlation. At the other end of the spectrum are multivariate analysis techniques that fully explore parameter correlations. In between are a number of techniques to provide some level of correlation analysis. Good examples

Processes 2017, 5, 39

7 of 20

are UVA analysis techniques in which variables can be combined in equations or as Boolean

variables; these techniques are often available in traditional FD solutions.

· Level of Incorporation of Dynamics: This dimension characterizes how completely the analytic can

track or profile the changes in relationships between parameters over time, e.g., capturing and

accommodating drift and shift in a process. At one end are purely static analytics that cannot

incorporate dynamics or do not even include a concept of dynamics or time in analysis. At the

other end are dynamics that fully address the evolution of relationships over time, e.g., with an

evolving model. In between these extremes are a variety of techniques that track or incorporate

dynamics to some level. Good examples are adaptive models such as those found in R2R control,

in which the model form may not be adjusted over time, but the model (zeroth order term) offset

is re-evaluated to track and capture dynamics [13].

· Level of Incorporation of State: This dimension identifies how well the analytic incorporates the

logical progression of system state in the analysis. In other words, it identifies how well the

analytic incorporates an understanding of how a system logically operates into the analysis. Note

that this is differentiated from the previous dimension where dynamics may be tracked, but logical

progression of system state may or may not be understood. At one extreme of this state dimension,

the analytic has no concept of state. These analytics are often called "snapshot" because they

provide an analysis at an instance of time. At the other end of the spectrum, state-based analytics

incorporate state evolution into the analysis.

· Level of Incorporation of SME: This dimension identifies the level to which SME is incorporated

into the analytic. At one end of the spectrum are purely statistical or data-driven analytics where

no SME is involved. Some "one-size-fits-all" multivariate (MVA) FD or EHM techniques fall into

this category where a dataset is analyzed statistically and an index is reported. At the other end

of the spectrum are purely non-statistical physical techniques that rely on complete knowledge

of the system with no data-driven component. Between these two extremes are a large number

of analytics where SME is incorporated to some extent. The incorporation may be as simple as

parameter down selection prior to data-driven analysis, or more complicated as in development

of model forms that define the physics of an operation (i.e., phenomenological models) that are

tuned using data-driven approaches. Note that, with this dimension, the level, type, method, and

formalism by which SME is incorporated can all vary.
Processes 2017, 5, 39

8 of 20

Figure 33.. DDiimmeennssioionnssofofanaanlayltyictsiccsapcapbialbitiileistiewsitwh imthapmpainpgpionfgtyopfictaylpaidcavlanadcevdanpcreodcespsrococnestrsocl o(AntPrCol) (sAolPuCti)osnosluintisoenms icnosnedmuicctoonrdmuacntourfamctaunruinfagctourtihnegsetodtihmeesnesdioimnse.nsions.
3.3. TGypiviceanl AthPeCseAdpimpliecnastiioonnss,aannd aAnnaallyyttiiccsoAr apnpraonaachlyessiisnaTpopdlaicya'stiSoenmciacnontdhuenctobreMdeafinnuefadctwuritinhgreFsapceilcittiteos the vAalupertehreeqcuaipsaitbeilittoy huansdienrsetaacnhddinimg etnhseionro. aAdsmaanpexfaomr pbliegofdaantaanaanlayltyicti,cpsriinncipseaml ciocomnpdouncetonrt manufacturing is understanding the current state of the art of analytics deployment. The existing analytics base provides a framework for data collection and configuration of big data solutions. Furthermore, it gives insight into the analytics culture in the industry as well as what approaches seem to work given the challenges of data quality, complexity, and dynamics outlined above.
Figure 4 illustrates the approach to FD that is pervasive in the industry today. The vast majority

Processes 2017, 5, 39

8 of 20

analysis (PCA), often used for MVA FD and EHM, is unsupervised, reactive, MVA, generally static, stateless, and does not formally incorporate SME [28]. With respect to analysis applications, FD in semiconductor fabs today (described further below) is largely unsupervised, reactive, UVA, stateless and statistically based with SME incorporated in FD model development [6,10,12,14,29]. Effective PdM solutions today are supervised, predictive, MVA, and stateless with SME incorporated in fault understanding and variable down-selection. In the future as data quality improves, these PdM solutions may become more state-based [6,30].
Defining analytics and analysis applications using these and other dimensions provides a framework for identifying gaps in capability, opportunities for advancement, and, over the longer term, roadmaps for analytics and applications improvement.

3.3. Typical APC Applications and Analytics Approaches in Today's Semiconductor Manufacturing Facilities

A prerequisite to understanding the roadmap for big data analytics in semiconductor

manufacturing is understanding the current state of the art of analytics deployment. The existing

analytics base provides a framework for data collection and configuration of big data solutions.

Furthermore, it gives insight into the analytics culture in the industry as well as what approaches seem

to work given the challenges of data quality, complexity, and dynamics outlined above.

Figure 4 illustrates the approach to FD that is pervasive in the industry today. The vast majority

of effective FD solutions are unsupervised and univariate, analyzing process trace data at the end of

each run to detect anomalies [29]. There is a focus on identifying features and applying limits tests

to determine if there are alarms. SME is used extensively to identify which traces and features to

monitor, what limits to set, and how to correlate limits violations to fault classifications. While these

methods are generally effective, there are issues of: (1) high numbers of missed and false alarms due

largely to the dynamic nature of the processes and lack of correlation to supervised data; (2) process

dynamics requiring resetting of models or limits; and (3) significant time required to manually set up

aPnrodcesmsesa2n0a1g7,e5,m39odels and limits.

9 of 20

FFiigguurree 44.. EEffffeeccttiivvee aannoommaallyy ddeetteeccttiioonn iinn sseemmiiccoonndduuccttoorr mmaannuuffaaccttuurriinngg ttooddaayy uussiinngg uunniivvaarriiaattee eenndd--ooff--rruunn ttrraaccee ddaattaa aannaallyyssiiss,, ffeeaattuurree eexxttrraaccttiioonn,, aanndd lliimmiittss mmoonniittoorriinngg,, lleevveerraaggiinngg ssuubbjjeecctt mmaatttteerr eexxppeerrttiissee ((SSMMEE))..
3.4. Emerging APC Analytics Applications and Analytics Trends in Semiconductor Manufacturing Facilities Anomaly detection has been extended to unsupervised MVA to support EHM in which single
MVAThtreacreesceanrteevuoseludtioton iinndsiecmateicothneduhcetoalrthmaonf utfhaecteuqriunigpmAePnCt aoprpeliqcuaitpiomnsenrtefsleucbt-ssyasmteomv.emTehnet pfrroemdoamminoarnetrmeaectthivoed tuospedrehdeicrteivisePaCnAd ,ewveitnhportohaecrtimveetahpopdrsoeamchptlooyfaecdtoinryclucodnintrgolon[6e,-1c7l,a2s0s].suFapipluorret detection is being augmented with failure prediction to support capabilities such as PdM. Metrology measurement prediction using VM is being leveraged to reduce cycle times due to metrology delay and improve process capability [36,37]. Predictive scheduling, first at the process level and eventually at the across-fab level is beginning to be leveraged to lessen some capacity constraints [38]. Yield prediction with feedback into process control, production scheduling, and maintenance

Processes 2017, 5, 39

9 of 20

vector machine (SVM), k-nearest neighbors (k-NN), auto-associative neural network, and hidden Markov models (HMMs) [26,31­34]. When an alarm occurs, a decomposition of the MVA model can provide a Pareto of contributors to a fault, aiding in classification. EHM systems are easier to configure and manage from a user interface perspective than traditional univariate FD systems, however, they generally are highly susceptible to noise and other data quality issues, are difficult to maintain in the face of system dynamics, and, like FD, are unsupervised, so there is no guarantee that an anomaly is actually a fault.
Model-based process control (MBPC) or R2R control is also employed extensively in semiconductor manufacturing [12]. There is a large literature base devoted to the evolution of this capability over the past two decades. The challenge for MBPC is that processes in semiconductor manufacturing are poorly observable, highly dynamic and subject to a large number of disturbances. It was determined early on that simple linear solutions that use exponentially weighted moving average (EWMA) filtering were effective [13]. Over the years, there has been a migration to more state-based solutions and single threaded solutions, in which a single model can be applied to control the production of multiple products in multiple context environments [13,15,35].
3.4. Emerging APC Analytics Applications and Analytics Trends in Semiconductor Manufacturing Facilities
The recent evolution in semiconductor manufacturing APC applications reflects a movement from a more reactive to predictive and even proactive approach to factory control [6,17,20]. Failure detection is being augmented with failure prediction to support capabilities such as PdM. Metrology measurement prediction using VM is being leveraged to reduce cycle times due to metrology delay and improve process capability [36,37]. Predictive scheduling, first at the process level and eventually at the across-fab level is beginning to be leveraged to lessen some capacity constraints [38]. Yield prediction with feedback into process control, production scheduling, and maintenance scheduling is being investigated so that fab-wide control can be optimized to yield-throughput objectives [39]. Eventually, these predictive solutions will extend more horizontally, incorporating upstream and downstream supply chain [1­3,17,20].
This evolution is relying heavily on the big data explosion in the face of the aforementioned industry data challenges. Specifically, support for larger volumes and longer archives of data has (to some extent) enabled predictive solutions to decipher complexities of multivariate interactions of parameters, characterize system dynamics, reject disturbances, and filter out data quality issues. In many cases, the algorithms in these solutions have to be rewritten to take advantage of the parallel computation afforded by big data solutions in order to process the data in a timely manner, or (as will be discussed later) new algorithms are leveraged that are more big data environment friendly. As an example, earlier predictive solutions relied on single core CPU and serial processing. With big data, popular techniques such as partial least squares (PLS) and support vector machines (SVM) are rewritten to allow parallel computation on a server farm [40,41]. Likewise, unsupervised data exploration techniques such as self-organizing map (SOM) and generative topographic mapping (GTM) are rewritten to consume large amount of data enabling people to quickly gain insights from the data [42,43]. Similarly, time-consuming techniques such as HMM and particle swarm optimization can be rewritten to become computationally far more efficient [44,45].
However, a plethora of techniques and a massive amount of data do not necessarily lead to more insights and predictive capability. It is the author's belief that no one approach or combination of approaches will be a panacea, but rather approaches will be customized to application spaces in terms of objective, available data, data quality, etc. Regardless of the approach, it is believed that SME will continue to guide solution development and maintenance.

Processes 2017, 5, 39

10 of 20

4. Case Studies of Big Data Analytics Approaches in Semiconductor Manufacturing
4.1. Next Generation Fault Detection and Classification (NG-FDC)
While fault detection has been an integral component of semiconductor manufacturing for at least a decade and provides significant required benefits (such as scrap reduction, quality improvement, and equipment maintenance indications), it continues to be plagued by high setup costs and high rates of false and missed alarms. This fact was underscored at the 2015 Integrated Measurement Association APC Council meeting, held in conjunction with the 2015 APC Conference ([46] and [6]). Here, top APC specialists from the microelectronics manufacturing user and supplier communities reached consensus on the following points: (1) "[There is a] need for automation of front-end of FD from model building to limits management, but keep in process and equipment expertise"; and (2) a major pain point in today's FDC systems is false and/or missed alarms. This fact was verified in the field; for example, a deployment expert indicated that it often takes up to two weeks to correctly configure univariate FD for a process tool, including collecting data, refining limits, and correlating limits violations to actual events of importance, and even after this process is completed there are often too many false alarms or missed alarms associated with a particular FD model [29].
The big data evolution afforded an opportunity in semiconductor manufacturing to provide an improved FDC capability that addresses these key pain points [6,29,47]. The FD portion of this NG-FDC technology contains two key components. The first component is trace level automated analysis: This component uses multivariate analysis techniques that are data-driven to detect and characterize anomalies [48]. It has the advantage of a one-size-fits-all approach to analysis that is easy to manage. It also can detect patterns in data that are not readily apparent or not suggested by an SME. However, because it does not incorporate SME very well, it can result in high numbers of false and missed alarms, lack appropriate prioritization of alarms, etc. [6,29].
The second component, semi-automated trace partitioning, feature extraction, and limits monitoring, directly addresses the pain points identified in the aforementioned APC Council industry meeting. The approach uses trace partitioning, feature extraction, and limits setting techniques that are semi-automated, allowing the incorporation of SME. With this approach, model building times can be drastically reduced by orders of magnitude depending on the level of SME incorporation, and results indicate that false and missed alarm rates are improved ([47] and [29] and [6]).
The trace partitioning component is illustrated in Figure 5. Common patterns of interest are determined by analyzing historical data and consulting with SMEs. Indeed, many of these patterns are signals that would typically result from a physical process such as turning on a switch (piecewise continuous step function), vibration or underdamped actuation (oscillation), momentary disturbance (spike), or drift (ramp). Using a myriad of search techniques organized in a hierarchical fashion, the boundaries of these features are determined and the sensor trace is partitioned; these techniques are described in more detail in [47]. Then techniques specific to each feature type are used to extract each feature model. Note that the solution is configurable in that there are settable parameters for each feature type used to: (1) distinguish a feature (sensitivity); and (2) distinguish between features (selectivity). In addition, the method is extensible in that additional feature types can be added to the detection hierarchy. SME is used to: (1) select the sensitivity and selectivity parameters; (2) choose, among the candidate features, which to extract and monitor for FD; and (3) fine tune partitions and model parameters as necessary.

PPPrrroooccceeesssssseeesss 222000111777,,, 555,,, 333999

111111ooofff222000

FeFeFeaiaaiigcggcchuhuhurrrssseeeeeen5nn55.s..ssoSooSSrerreemtmmttrrraiaaii--c-ccaaaeeeuuuitiitstsosoopmppmmaaaaaarrrtttttteieeiitdttddiiiooottntrnnrraeaeeacdcddceeeaaapppllloaooaanrnnrrttgtggiiitttittitiohohhoneneeniibinbbnnogoogguuuiiinnnnnndddwwwaaarhrrhhiiiieieeicccssshhhoooppfpffaaeaeetatatatttcecceehrhhrrnnnooosssfffoootttfhhfhfieeieinnsnssteeteteeeprpprreeaeaasststttttttteeeaaarrrrrnrnneeesssddd(((errereifiiffigigginnnhhheeetttd)d)d)... (((llleeefffttt)));;; aaannnddd ttthhheeennn
FFFiiiggguuurrreee 666 sssuuummmmmmaaarrriiizzzeeesss ttthhheee rrreeesssuuullltttsss ooofff aaapppppplllyyyiiinnnggg ttthhhiiisss NNNGGG---FFFDDDCCC cccaaapppaaabbbiiillliiitttyyytttooo aaa pppuuubbbllliiiccc eeetttccchhh dddaaatttaaa ssseeettt [[(4[44777,, ]66a]]..nTTdhh[rr6ee]ee).aaTpphpprrreooeaaaccphhpeesrsottaoocahanneasalltyyossiaissnwwaleeyrrseeisccwoommerppeaacrroeemdd::p((a11r))ewwd:hh(oo1ll)eewttrrhaaocceleessttraaattciissettisicctsas tiiinnstwiwchshiiicnchhwwwhhhicoohlleewttrhraaoccleee mmtreaeacaennmaanenaddnvvaaanrrdiiaavnnaccereiawwnecerereewuuessreeddustteoodddteoettederremmteiirnnmeeifnfaaeuufllattsus;;lt((s22;))(2mm) amannauunaaullawwl wiinniddnoodwwoiwinniggngiinninwwwhhhiiccihchhbbbeeesssttt ggguuueeessssss mmmaaannnuuuaaalll ttteeeccchhhnnniiiqqquuueeessswwweereerreeusuuessdeedfdorffooprrarpptiaatirrottinittiionongniinannggdaafnendadtuffreeeaatetuuxrrtereaceetxxitotrrnaa;ccattiinoodnn;;(3aa)nnsdedm((3i3-))aussteeommmii-a-aatueudttoofmmeaaattuteerdde ffeeexaatttruuarcreteioeexnxttarrasaccdtteiioofinnneaadssaddbeeoffivinneeewddaaasbbeoomvvepelwwoyaaessdeemfmoprpFllooDyy.eeAddSffoOorrMFFDDcl..uAAsteSSrOOinMMg accpllupusrstoteearrciihnnggwaaappsppurrsooeadaccthho wowpaatssimuusiszeeeddthttooe ooaplpattriimmiilzzieme tiththseesaeatllatairrnmmg flloiimmr eiitatsschsseeattpttiipnnrggoaffocohrr e[e4aa2cc]hh. Taahppepprroeosaaucchlhts[[4i4n22d]]..icTTahhteetrhreeessusuelltmtssiii-nnaduditicocaamtteeatttehhdeetsrseaemcmeii-p-aaauurttoiotmmioanattieenddg ttarrnaadcceefeppaaatrurttriitetiiooenxntiirnnaggctaainonnddoffeueaatpttuuerrrefeoeerxxmttrrsaatcchttieiooonnthooeuurttpappeerprffrooorrammchssettshhieenoottethhrmeerrsaaoppfpprreroodaauccchheeedssfiiannlstteeerarmmlasrsmoofsf r(refeaddlusueccepeddosffiaatlilsvseee aarlalaatrermm) assn((dffaamllsseiespspeoodssiitatiilvvaeremrraastte(e1))maanninddumms itisrssuseeeddpaaollsaairrtmimvses ((r11ammtei)inn. uuss ttrruuee ppoossiittiivvee rraattee))..
FFFiiiggguuurrreee 666... RRReeesssuuulltlttsss ooofff aaapppppplllyyyiiinnnggg fffaaauuulllttt dddeeettteeeccctttiiiooonnn aaannnddd ccclllaaassssssiiifffiiicccaaatttiiiooonnn (((FFFDDDCCC))) wwwiiittthhh ssseeemmmiii---aaauuutttooommmaaattteeeddd tttrrraaaccceee pppaaarrrtttiiitttiiiooonnniiinnnggg aaannnddd fffeeeaaatttuuurrreee eeexxxtttrrraaaccctttiiiooonnn...
WWiitthh sseemmii---aauuttoommaatteedd ttrraaccee ppaarrttiittiioonniiinnngggaannddd ffeeaattuuurrree eexxttrraacctttiiiooonnniinn ppllaaccee,,, aa ccaannddiiddaattee sseett ooff FFDD mmooddeellss cccaaannn aaauuutttooommmaaatttiiicccaaallllylyybbbeeeppprerresesesenenntettededdtottoothttehheSeMSSMME EfEofrfoodrroddwoonwwsnnelsseeecllteeiocctntiio.onTn.h. TeThhdeeowddonowwsennlessceetllieeoccnttiipoornnocpperrsoosccceeasssns ccbaaennaibbdeeedaaiiiddfeesdudpiieffrsvsuuisppeeedrrvvdiiassteeaddisddaaavttaailiiassbaalevvaaisillaathbbleleereaalssatttihohenesrrheeillpaattbiioeontnwsshheieippn bfbeeeatttwwuereeeesnnafnfeedaattpuurrroeecssesaasnnoddr pepqrrooucciepessmsseoonrrt eefqaquuuliitppsmmcaeennnbtteffdaaueutllettssrmcciaannnedbb.eeAfddteeertteetrhrmme iainnpeepddr.o. pAArfifatteeterr fittnhhaeel laaispptpporrfooFppDrriiamatteoedffeiinlnsaahllalsliisbstteeoonffdFFeDDtermmmioonddeedell,ssmhhoaanssitobbreeienenng ddlieemtteeirtrsmmmiinnueesddt,,bmmeoosnneiitttootorriinnpggrollivimmidiitetssammbuuassltat bnbeceesseebttettoowppereroonvvfiidadleeseaaabbnaaldlaannmcceiesbsbeeedttwwaeelaeenrnmffaasl.lsseAe aasnnsddhommwiissnsseeidnd aFalliaagrrummress..7AA, sas ssrhehocoewwivnneriinnoFpFieiggruuartrieen7g7,,caahrareercaceceitivveereirrstooipcpee(rRraaOttiinCngg) cccahhnaarrbaaecctteperrlioissttttiieccd((RRfoOOrCCe))accahannFbbDee mppllooodtttteeelddinffoowrr heeaiaccchhh tFFhDDe lmmimooiddtesellaiirnne wwadhhjiuiccshhtettdhhe[e4ll9iim]m. iIitftssthaaerreeliamaddijtjuusssattreeeddv[e[44r99y]].w. IIiffdttehh,eethllieimmmiitotssdaaerrleeisvvienerrsyyenwwsiiitddiveee,, ttshhoeethmmeoroeddaeerlleiissfeiiwnnssfeeannlssseiittiaivvlaeersmsoos,tthhbeuerrteehaaigrrehe ffleewvweflfsaallossfeemaalliaasrsrmemdss,a, blbauurtmt hhsii.ggIhhf tllheeveveellilsms ooitffsmmariisesssveeeddryaalltaairgrmmhtss,..tIhIffetthhreeevlleiimrmsieittsissaatrreeuvev.eerTryyhettiigcghhhatt,l,lttehhneegrereeivvseetrrossede eiisstettrrrmuueein.. TeThhaene ccohhpaatlillmleennaglgeleimiissitttosoetddtieenttegerrtmmhaiinnt eebaaalnannoocpepsttiitmmheaallolcliicmmuirittressneectttetiisnnoggf tthhruaatet babnaaldlaanfnaccleesses ptthhoeesiotoicvccceuusrrtrroeentnhcceeesscooosfft totrrfuuteeheaasnneddevffaealnlsstees ppinoostsihitteiivvpeeassrttooictuthhleaerccaoopsstpt ooliffctathhtieeossnee.eeAvveesnnotltsus tiininontthhteeopptaharirsttiicpcuurollaabrrleaamppppilnliicvcaaottliivooenns..pAAlosstootillnuugttiioaonncottoostttfhhuiisnscpptrirooonbblloeemnmtioinnpvvooofllvvteheses ppRllOoottCttiinnagngdaa iccsoodsstteftfuauinnleccdttiiooinnn[oo5nn0]tt.oopp ooff tthhee RROOCC aanndd iiss ddeettaaiilleedd iinn [[5500]]..

PPrroocceesssseess 22001177,, 55,, 3399

1122 ooff 2200

FFiigguurree 77.. UUssaaggee ooff rreecceeiivvee ooppeerraattiinngg cchhaarraacctteerriissttiicc ((RROOCC)) pplloottss ttoo ddeetteerrmmiinnee ooppttiimmaall ffaauulltt ddeetteeccttiioonn ((FFDD)) lliimmiittss sseettttiinnggss;; pplloott ooff ttrruuee//ffaallsseeppoossiittiivveerraatteessaassaaffuunnccttiioonn ooff FFDD lliimmiittss sseettttiinnggss..
After mmooddeelslsanadndlimlimts ihtsavheabveeenbseeetnupseftoruapsyfsotrema, tshyesytemmu, sthbeeymmanuasgtedbeinmananeangveidroninmeannt ethnavtirisoonfmteenntitmtheastviesroyftdeynntiammeics,vwerityhdnyunmaemroicu,swpirtohcnesusmaenrdouprsopdruocctedssisatunrdbpanrocedsuacnt ddicsotunrtebxatnccheasnagneds (ceo.ng.t,epxtrocdhuacntgcehsa(neg.ge.s,).pMroodduecltacnhdanligmeist)s. mMaondaegleamnednltimreimtsaminasnaacgheamllengt er,ebmuatinissoaftcehnaalclecnogmep, lbisuhteids wofittehnaavcacroiemtypolifshtoeodlswfoirthmaodveal rpireet-ytreoaftmtoeonlst tfooardmdroedsselcopnrtee-xttr,ematomdeenl tcotnotiandudoruessuspcdoantteetxot,sumpopdoertl pcoronctiensus oduysnaumpidcast,eantdo msuopdpeol ratndprloimceists udpydnaatme tircisg,gaenridngmaondderlebanudildliinmgitosr rueptadragtetitnrgig[g5e1r]i.ng and rebuilding or retargeting [51]. 4.2. Predictive Maintenance (PdM)
4.2. PTrehdeicctoivnecMepatinotfenPadnMce (iPndMse)miconductor industries grew out of the high cost of unscheduled
downTthime ecotnhcaetpitnoclfuPddeMs coinstsoemf yicioelnddulocstsoraninddumsatriinetsengarenwce oinutaodfdtihtieonhitgohlocoststporof duuncstcihonedtuimlede. dPorawctnittiimoneertsharteainliczleuddethsactoustniovfaryiiaetledFlDosssyasntedmms acionuteldnasnocme eitnimaedsdibteionlevtoeralogsetdptroodduecteticotntrteinmdes. Pinraacptiatirotinceurlsarrevaalriziaebdlet;htahteusne itvraenridastecFoDuldsytshteenmbseceoxutlrdapsoomlateetdimtoesdbeetelremveinraegaepdptrooxdiemteacttetrreemndasiniinnga puaserftiuclulliafer (vRaUriLa)bolef;athpeasreticturelanrdcsocmopuoldnetnhte.nScbheedexutlreadpmolaaitnetdentoandceetceorumldinteheanppbreoaxdimjuastedretomraeidnuincge uthsefouclcluifrere(nRcUe Lo)f oufnsachpeadrtuicleudlardocwomntpimoneenotr. eSxctheendduulepdtimeain(itfenscahnecdeucloeduldmathinetnenbaencaedjiussotevdertloy rceodnusecrevathtieveo)c. cHuorrweenvcer,oafsunnostcehdeedaurlieedr, dseomwincotinmdeucotroremxtaenudfaucptutirmineg (pifrosccehsesedsualeredcmhaarianctteenraiznecdebiys ocovmerplylexciotnysaenrvdavtiavrei)a.biHlitoyw, aenvdera, reassunbojetecdt toeafreliqeur,enstemdiisctounrdbaunctcoers. mAasnaurfeascutultr,inthge upnroivceasrsiaetse aFrDe cehxtarraapcotelaritzioend mbyechoamnpislmexsitfyoarnpdrevdaircitainbgilimtya,ianntednaarnecseuabsjemctetnotiforneqedueanbtodviestaurrebgaenncersa. lAlys naorteosupltti,mthael, uronbivuastrioarteevFeDn meaxitnratapionlaabtiloen. mechanisms for predicting maintenance as mentioned above are generTahlleyanpoptroapcthimtoalP, droMbuthstaot rseeevmens tmo abientmaionsatbelfefe. ctive in semiconductor manufacturing uses FD or NG-FTDhCe aopuptprouat cdhatao aPldonMg twhiatthsmeeaminstetonabnecemdoastae,fcfoencttievxet idnastae,mpircoocnedssudctaotra,manadnupfoatcetnutriianlglyupsreoscFesDs omreNtroGl-oFgDyCdaotuatptoudt edvaetaloaplopnregdwicittihvemmaoindtelnsaunsciengdaotfaf,-lcinoentuesxitndgaMtaV, Aprtoeccehsnsidquateas, [a6n,3d0]p. oTthenetgiaolalyl, pasroscheosws nmientrFoilgougrye d8at,aisttooddeevveelloopp parpedreidctiicvteormthoadtealsllouwsisngthoefuf-slienretoupsirnegdiMctVaAfutteucrhenfiaqiuluerse[a6l,o3n0]g. wThitehgoobatla, iansinsghoawn nesitnimFaigteudreti8mae, itsotfoaidluevreel(oTpTFa)phroerdiizcotonratnhdatsaolmloewisndthiceautisoenr otof cpornefiddicetnacefuintuorer frainlugreeoaf ltohnegprweidthictoiobnta. iTnhinegfaainlureestiinmdaicteadtiotnimtreigtgoerfacialunrebe(TasTFsi)mhpolreizaosna athnrdesshoomlde (iansdsihcaotwionn) orf caomnfoidreencocemipnloerxraannagleysoifstohfeapdreedgircatidoant.ioTnhepfraoifiluler.eTinhdeictraitgiognertriisgsgeetrbcaasnebdeoans tshime pcolenafisdaenthcereoshf othlde p(arsedsihcotiwon,) bourt aalmsootroepcroomvipdlexa aTnTaFlythsiast oufseafudletgortahdeatuiosenr p(er.ogf.i,lteh. eTahpeptrroigxgimeraties tsiemt ebnaesecdessoanrythtoe caolingfnidmenaicneteonf athneceprreesdoiuctricoens,).but also to provide a TTF that useful to the user (e.g., the approximate time necessary to align maintenance resources).
The off-line modeling process used to achieve this goal is illustrated in Figure 8b. Note that techniques for data aggregation, treatment, feature selection, model building and analysis, and model optimization through cost-benefit analysis are largely the same as the techniques used in NG-FDC. Indeed, these same techniques can be leveraged for other predictive capabilities such as

within each failure type, and the impact to process variability and context (e.g., product changes). There often is not sufficient data to fully characterize a particular piece of equipment using purely data-driven methods, and this problem is often not solvable with improved big data practices because the process or equipment changes enough over time to make longer term data histories Psroocmesseews 2h01a7t, 5ir, r3e9levant. Thus, SME of equipment, equipment components, and processes is u1s3uoaf l2l0y leveraged heavily in PdM model building and maintenance.
(a)
(b)
FFigiguurree88. .TThheeaapppprrooaacchhttoopprreeddicicttiviveemmaainintteennaannccee::((aa))tthheemmuullttiivvaarriiaatteeaannaallyyssiiss((MMVVAA))pprreeddicictotorraanndd itistsccoommppoonneennttssininccluluddiinnggttimimee--ttoo--ffaaiilluurree hhoorriizzoonn aanndd ssoommee eexxpprreessssiioonn ooffpprreeddicicttioionnccoonnfifdideenncceeoorr rraannggee; ;aanndd(b(b))ththeeoofff-fl-ilnineemmooddeel lbbuuilidldininggaannddoopptitmimizizaatitoionnaapppprrooaacchhththaattpprroovvidideessaammeecchhaannisismmffoorr ininccoorrppooraratitninggsusbujbecjetcmt amttaetrteerxpeexrptiesreti(sSeM(ES)M, aEn)d, acnand bceanlevbeeralgeevderfaogremdafnoyr amdvaannyceaddvparoncceesds cpornotcreosls (AcoPnCtr)oplr(eAdPicCti)vperceadpicatbivileiticeasp. abilities.
An example of application of PdM for an epitaxial process is shown in Figure 9. Epitaxial equiTphmeeonftf-ilsinuesemdotdoeglirnogwpfriolmcessssuucshedastooxaicdhaiteiovne tohnissegmoaicloisndilulucstotrrasteudrfainceFs.igBuarnek8sbo.f Nlaomtepsthaarte tuecshendiqtouecsrfeoartedahteaaatgsgoretghaattioan,fitlrmeatims ednetp, ofesaitteudreosrelgecrotiwonn, mtoodaepl rbeuciilsdeinthgiacnkdneasnsaelyvseins,lya.ndUtmiliozdinelg optimization through cost-benefit analysis are largely the same as the techniques used in NG-FDC. Indeed, these same techniques can be leveraged for other predictive capabilities such as VM and yield prediction. In the case of PdM, large amounts of data are needed so that failure prediction models accommodate factors such as the potentially long degradation profile of some failure types (which could be months or years), large number of failures types and failure modes within each failure type, and the impact to process variability and context (e.g., product changes). There often is not sufficient data to fully characterize a particular piece of equipment using purely data-driven methods, and this problem is often not solvable with improved big data practices because the process or equipment

Processes 2017, 5, 39

14 of 20

changes enough over time to make longer term data histories somewhat irrelevant. Thus, SME of
equipment, equipment components, and processes is usually leveraged heavily in PdM model building
and maintenance.
An example of application of PdM for an epitaxial process is shown in Figure 9. Epitaxial
ePqrouceispsems 2e0n17t,i5s, 3u9sed to grow films such as oxidation on semiconductor surfaces. Banks of lamp14soafr2e0 used to create heat so that a film is deposited or grown to a precise thickness evenly. Utilizing
ssttrraaiigghhtt--ffoorrwwaarrddUUVVAAFFDD, ,lalammpprerepplalacecmemenent tcacnanbbeepprerdedicitcetdedonolnyly4­45­5h hininadavdavnacnec,ew, whihchichlealedasdtsotao haighhigrhiskrisokf uonfeuxpneexctpeedctleadmplafmaiplufraeisluarneds uannedxpuencetxepdedcotewdndtiomwen. tUimtilei.ziUngtilMiziVnAg PMdVMA, laPmdMp f,alialumrpe cfaainlubreepcraendicbteedpfirevdeidctaeyds ifnivaeddvaanycseiwn iathdvabanoucet 8w5%ithacacbuoruacty8, 5re%duaccicnugruacnys,chreedduulceidngdouwnnscthimedeualnedd idnocwrenastiimngetahnroduignhcpreuats.iPnogtethnrtoiaulgfohrpiumt.pPaoctteins teisatlimfoartiemdpaat c$t1i0s8eKst(iUmSaDte)dpeart p$1ro0c8eKss(UchSaDm)bpeerrpperroyceeasrs. Tchhaemsobleurtipoenrisyeroarb.uTsthteosporlouctieosns disistruorbbuasnt cteos pinrcolcuedssindgisRt2uRrbcaonnctersolinpcrloucdeisnsgtuRn2iRngc; ovnirttruoal lpsreoncseosrs mtuondinegls; vwiretrueadl esvenelsoopremdotdoedlsecwoeurpeldeedviestlouprbeadntcoeds efrcoomuptlheedpisrteudribcatniocnessifgronmal t[h6e]. prediction signal [6].

Figure 9. Illustration of epitaxial process lamp replacemeenntt pprreeddiiccttiivvee mmaaiinntteennaannccee ((PPddMM))..
55.. DDiissccuussssiioonn:: TThhee EEvvoollvviinngg BBiigg DDaattaa LLaannddssccaappee aanndd AAnnaallyyttiiccss
TThhee aannaallyyttiiccss llaannddssccaappee iinn sseemmiiccoonndduuccttoorr mmaannuuffaaccttuurriinngg ccoonnttiinnuueess ttoo eevvoollvvee iinn ppaarrtt dduuee ttoo SSMM ddiirreeccttiivveess aanndd iinnnnoovvaattiioonn,, bbuutt aallssoo dduuee ttoo tthhee eevvoolluuttiioonn ooff bbiigg ddaattaa iinn aann aannaallyyttiiccss llaannddssccaappee iinn aanndd oouuttssiiddee ooff mmaannuuffaaccttuurriinngg.. IInn tthhiiss sseeccttiioonn,, aa ffeeww ooff tthhee ffaaccttoorrss iimmppaaccttiinngg tthhee eevvoolluuttiioonn ooff SSMM aannaallyyttiiccss aarree eexxpplloorreedd..
5..1.. Big Data Architectureess
TThhee mmoovveetotobigbidgatdaaatnaalayntaiclsytiocssutpoposurtpSpMorctoSnMcepctosnincespetms icinonsdeumctiocornmdauncutofarctmurainnugfiancctluurdinegs tihneclumdoevsetthoemmoorevebitgo dmatoarefribeingddlyatpalaftrfioernmdlsy. Aplsaatfnoremxasm. Aplse,aAn peaxcahmepHlea,dAooppacihseanHoapdeono-psoius racen soopfetwn-asroeurfrcaemsoefwtworakrefofrasmtoerwagoerkanfodr lsatrogrea-gsecaalnedprlaorcgees-ssicnagleopf rdoacteassseitnsgoonf cdluatsatseertssoofncocmlumsteordsitoyf hcoarmdmwoardeit[y52h].aHrdawdaoroep [l5e2v]e.raHgaeds opoapralleevleprraogceessspinagraallnedl spcraolcaebsisliitnygcaapnadbislictaielasbtioliptyrocvaidpeabsioliltuietisontos tpariolovrieddetsoolaurtgioentsimtaei-lsoerreidestodalatargseetstimsuec-hsearsietsradcaetdasaettas. sMuochstalsartgraecseemdaitcao.nMduocstolrarmgeansuemfaicctounredruscatroer imncaonrupfoarcattuinregrsoraarteleinasctoervpaolruaattiningg obrigadt alteaapstlaetfvoarlmuastwinigthbtihge dparetadopmlaitnfaonrmt cshowicitehbethinegpHreadomopin[4a6n]t. Icnhogiecneebreailn, gcoHnavdeorosipon[46to]. aInHgaednoeroapl, icnofnravsetrrsuioctnutroe awHilal dporopviidnefrasntruumctbuerre wofilbl epnreofivtisd,eiancnlumdibnegr: (o1f) bloewneefritcs,osint colfudowinnge: r(s1h) ilpow(CeOr Oco)stofofdaotwanseorlsuhtiopn(sC; O(2O) )moofrdeaetfaficsoielnutidonatsa; (s2t)ormagoere; (e3f)fiicmiepnrtodvaetda qstuoerraygep;ro(3c)esimsinpgrosvpeededqsu;e(r4y) ipmropcreosvseindgasnpaelyedtisc;s(p4)erifmorpmroavnecde;aannadly(t5ic)sbpetetrefroermnaabnlcine;gaonfdp(r5e)dbicettitveer aenaalbyltiincgs, owfitphreadnaicltyisvies qaunanlytitfiycsin, gwtihthesaenaadlvyasinstaqgueasn[t5i3fy].inHgowtheevser,atdhveasne tpalgaetfso[r5m3s].aHreogweenveerar,llythneoset spulaittefdortmo sreaarle-tigmeneeorratlliymenoctristiuciatledont-olinreaal-ntaimlyeticoarl toipmeeractriiotnicsaol nonth-leinfeacatonraylyfltiocoarl. oTpheursa,tnioenasr-ofuntuthre faaccttoorryy flfloooorr.dTathaums,anneaagre-fmuetunrtesofaluctoiornysflwooilrl ldikaetalymbaenaaHgeamdoeonpt soorluothioenrsbwigildlaltiak-eflryiebnedlayHecaodsoyosptemor coothmebrinbeigd wdaittha-afrsimenadllytraencosascytsitoenmal combpionneedntwpirtohbabslmy baellsttrsaunitseadcttioonaarlelcaotimonpaolndeanttabparsoeb,athbelylabtteesrt bsueintegdutsoeadrteolastuiopnpaolrdt atitmabeacsrei,ttihcaell(ait.ete.,r"breeianlg-tiumseed")toansaulpypsiosrat ntidmaescsroicticaatel d(i.eex.,e"cruetaiol-nti.mAe"m) iagnraaltyiosins paantdh afrsosmocitaratedditieoxneaclurteiolant.ioAnaml tiogrmatoiroenbpigatdhatfar-ofmrientrdaldyitairocnhailtercetularteiosnmaul sttobme soureppboigrteddatsao-ftrhiaetntdhley adrcvhaintetcatguersesofmbuostthbdeastuapbapsoertsetdruscotuthreast tchaenabdevlaenvteargaegseodf, baontdhtdhaetasbhasre sotfrutacstkusreasscsaignnbeedlteovethraegbeidg, and the share of tasks assigned to the big data-friendly portion can be adjusted as innovation allows these architectures to support more and more time critical on-line tasks [21,29,53].
5.2. Emergence of Artificial Intelligence and Other Big Data-Friendly Analytics
The term "AI" can be used to describe any device or analytic that perceives its environment and

Processes 2017, 5, 39

15 of 20

data-friendly portion can be adjusted as innovation allows these architectures to support more and more time critical on-line tasks [21,29,53].
5.2. Emergence of Artificial Intelligence and Other Big Data-Friendly Analytics
The term "AI" can be used to describe any device or analytic that perceives its environment and takes action to achieve a goal. Today, the term is often used to refer to the concept of these devices or analytics mimicking the function of the human brain, such as in self-driving automobile applications [54]. Artificial neural networks (ANN), which is an example of this type of analytic, has been around for decades. These types of AI analytics have seen resurgence as part of the big data evolution. For example, Deep Learning is a technique that is very similar to structured ANN and leverages hierarchical abstraction for improved quality and speed of high-volume data analysis. As noted in [55], "Deep Learning can be utilized for addressing some important problems in Big Data Analytics, including extracting complex patterns from massive volumes of data, semantic indexing, data tagging, fast information retrieval, and simplifying discriminative tasks." Deep Learning techniques benefit from increased data volumes in big data environments and uses data-driven supervised techniques to find relationships in data. The main drawback in on-line manufacturing analytics applications is its inability to incorporate SME in model development and maintenance [56]. In addition, developed models are generally not explicitly available so it is often difficult to assess the future robustness of these models. Recently, there have been research efforts focused on combining SME with AI techniques; these techniques hold promise for future application on the manufacturing floor [57].
Another analytical capability that is receiving significant attention in industrial big data applications is background analysis by solutions often termed as "crawlers" [53]. These application mine data in the background looking for particular patterns or analytical results of interest, such as a part nearing fault, and then asynchronously inform a consuming application such as a factory control system so that appropriate action can be taken. This approach allows analytics to be performed in the background so that they can be better managed with higher priority tasks such as factory control. It also allows the development and management of these diagnostics and prognostics to be more re-configurable.
5.3. Realizing the Complete Smart Manufacturing Vision
A cursory review of literature reveals that there are many depictions of the SM vision. Figure 10 shows a vision that has been proposed for the semiconductor manufacturing industry ([17] and [6]), which illustrates some common SM themes in the industry such as:
· Integration with the supply chain network: The smart factory will become an integral part of the supply chain with factory optimization part of overall supply chain optimization. The tighter connectivity will allow for leaner operation, higher flexibility of operation, improved response to demand, and better traceability for analytics such as warranty recall investigation. It will also represent an integration of the SM vision up and down the supply chain.
· Improved use of cyber-physical systems (CPS): CPS refers to the "tight conjoining of and coordination between computational and physical resources" [58]. While systems that generally integrate computational and physical resources have been in existence for some time, future systems will continue to improve in terms of "adaptability, autonomy, efficiency, functionality, reliability, safety, and usability." Big data analytics will play an important role in the advancement of these CPSs.
· Incorporating the simulation space and the concepts of virtual factory and digital twin: the prediction vision for semiconductor manufacturing is identified as "a state of fab operations where (1) yield and throughput prediction is an integral part of factory operation optimization, and (2) real-time simulation of all fab operations occurs as an extension of existing system with dynamic updating of simulation models." [19,20]. The latter concept, which is a component of the CPS vision, is

Processes 2017, 5, 39

16 of 20

often referred to as "digital twin." Many of the predictive applications being developed in the

industry today will likely continue to evolve to more directly support this vision.

· Leveraging big data architectures infrastructures: These infrastructures include the data management,

but also the analytics and applications that leverage the infrastructure to improve SM operation.

· Leveraging advanced analytics: As noted throughput this paper, the benefits of the big data evolution

will be provided primarily by applying analytics that take advantage of big data to improve

Procesesxesis2t0i1n7g, 5c, 3a9pabilities such as FDC or realize new capabilities such as prediction.

16 of 20

· Reliance on a knowledge network: The overall consensus of the SM vision in semiconductor

 mRealniaunfcaectounriangknisowthleadtgeSMneEtwkonrko:wTlehdegoevwerialllcoconntisneunesutso obfe tlheeveSrMagevdisaiosnanininsteemgriacol npdaurtctoofr

amnalnyutifcaacltusorilnugtioinsst,hwaitthSMcoEopkenraotwiolnedregqeuwireildl bcoetnwtieneuneutsoerbs,esolelvuetiroangesudpapsliearns,ianntedgerqaul ippamrtenotf

aanndalcyotmicaplonseonlutstimonasn,ufwacituhrecros otopesruaptpioonrt aresqeurviriecde-bbaesetwd eaepnprouascehrsf,orsdoleulitvioenringsuapnpdlimerasi,ntaanind

seoqlutipiomnsen[1t9a,n20d].cIosmsupeosnseuncths amsadnautafaschtuarienrgs taondsuppaprotirttioansinegrv, icnet-ebllaescetduaalppprroopaecrhtyfosercduerliitvy,earinndg

manadnamgianigntsaoilnutsionlustinontshe[1c9lo,2u0d].hIasvseueasll scuocmhe atos tdhaetfaorsehfarorinntgasapndartpoafrtihteiomnionvge, tionteenllheactnucael

spurpoppoertyfosretchuerictoyo, apnedramtivaenkagnionwglseodlguetinoentswinortkhe[1c9l,o2u0,d25h,a4v6]e. all come to the forefront as part of

the move to enhance support for the cooperative knowledge network [19,20,25,46].

FFiigguurree101.0A. sAmasrmt maratnumfaacntuufrainctguvriinsigonvdiseipoinctiodnepfoicrtisoenmicfoorndsuecmtoircomnadnuucftaocrtumrinagn,uwfaicthtupreinrmg,iswsioitnh fproemrm[i1s7si]o. nCofrpoymrig[1h7t]A. CdovpaynrciegdhtPArodcvesasnCceodntPrroolcCesosnCfeorenntrcoel, C20o1n6f.erence, 2016.
66.. CCoonncclluussiioonnss SSmmaarrttmmanaunfuafcatcutruirnigngis aisn eavnoluevtioolnutiniomn ainnufmacatunruifnagctcuarpinabgilictaiepsatbhialittiiessfotchuastedisonfoimcupsreodvinogn
oimpeprraotivoinnsgthorpoeurgahtiotingshttehrrionutgeghrattiigohnt,elriniknitneggroaftipohny, silcinakl ainngd coyfbeprhcyaspicaablilaitnieds, cleyvbeerragcianpgatbhileitbieigs, dleavtaereavgoilnugtitohne, baingddtaatkainegvoalduvtiaonnt,aagnedoftainkfionrgmaadtvioanntaangde aonf ainlyfotircms.aTtihoins eavnodluatnioanlyhtiacss.bTehenisoecvcoulrurtiinogn uhnaesvbeenelnyoacccruorsrsiningduunsetrvieens,lythaucsroasnsoinpdpuosrttruinesit,ytheuxsisatsntooplpooorktuant iotytheexriisntsdtuostlroioeks taot hotehlperdientdeurmstriniees stooluhteiolpn danetderrmoaindemsaopluptaiothns afonrdarpoaardtmicuaplarpiantdhsusftorry asupcahrtaiscubliaorchinedmuissttrryy osrucbhiolaosgby.ioPcrhoefimliinsgtryanodr cboimolopgayri.nPgrothfielsinegananaldytciocms upsairnignga tdhiemseenasniaolnytaicpspurosiancgh aaldloimwesnfosiroindeanptpifryoiancghcaallpoawbisliftoiersidaesnwtiefyllinasg gcaappsabainlidtireosaadsmwaepllsafsorgfauptsuarendimrpoarodvmeampesnfto. r future improvement.
TThheesemseimcoicnodnudcutocrtomr anmufaancutufarcintugriinndgustinryduissctrhyaraicstercizheadrabcyteprirzeecdise pbryocepsrseincigsereqpuriroecmesesnintsg, hldrieigagqhthuatliyorqfecumtoahmleeintspyetls.ei,sxIhsnauignelhidsgl,yhdetyxcpnoomaefrmpitehilnceexcseeeqauininsidpsaumdneyaeslnn,yattemiaxcnpaicdlesrepioqerlunouicctpeieomsnsienedns,eatapnanalnodldyyitmpsiscreuaonlectsesrsoiesnlveumset,aiaoalnsnnutdhdfaaiesctpstiuulnoercyisonmirgnpednomartataartneiqnuvugfeaaaSclltMisutyrEt.ihnIiansgt uinsucoarllpyorreaqtuinirgedSMtoEreiaslizuesuroablluystraenqduimreadinttoainreaablliezesorluobtiuosnts.aTnhdismfaacitnitsahinigahbllieghsoteldutiinoncass. eTshtuisdifeasctfoirs nheixgthgliegnhetreadtioinn fcaauslet dsteutedciteisonfoarndnecxlatsgsiefinceartaiotino,nanfdaupltreddeicteticvteiomnaainntdencalnascsei.fiAcantaiolynt,icasnwdillpcroedntiicntiuvee tmo abienlteevnearnacgee. dAantahlyigtihcesrwrailtlecsoinntSinMuecotorrebseploenvderinaggeidn alatrhgiegphaerrtrwatieths itnheSbMigcdoarrteasepvoonlduitniogni.nWlahriglee mpaertthowdsithforthdeatabiqguadliattyaimevporoluvteiomne.nWt ahnidleSMmEetihnocdosrpfoorratidoantawiqllueavliotylveimaspprorovbemlemenst aarendsolSvMedE, tihnecsoerpfaocrtaotrisonwwillilllikeevloylvreemasaipnraosblkeemyscaormepsoonlveendt,stohfetsheefaacntaolrystiwcsilrloliakdemlyarpemfoariSnMas. key components of the analytics roadmap for SM.
Longer term the vision of SM will continue to leverage analytics to promote improvements in cyber-physical linkages, including the use of the concepts of virtual factory and digital twin. Improved integration up and down the supply chain will serve to advanced factory capabilities such as throughput, quality, and efficiency, but also will tend to bring a level of commonality to SM concepts and implementation roadmaps that should help facilitate a consistent SM vision across the

Processes 2017, 5, 39

17 of 20

Longer term the vision of SM will continue to leverage analytics to promote improvements in cyber-physical linkages, including the use of the concepts of virtual factory and digital twin. Improved integration up and down the supply chain will serve to advanced factory capabilities such as throughput, quality, and efficiency, but also will tend to bring a level of commonality to SM concepts and implementation roadmaps that should help facilitate a consistent SM vision across the enterprise.

Acknowledgments: The authors would like to acknowledge technical and editing contributions from Brad Schulze, Michael Armacost, Heng Hao and Todd Snarr at Applied materials; Chao Jin, Yuan Di and Xiaodong Jia at the University of Cincinnati; and Felipe Lopez at the University of Michigan. The authors would also like to acknowledge the following organizations for their support of the development of semiconductor manufacturing analytics: The Integrated Measurement Association and the Advanced Process Control Conference, The International Roadmap for Devices and Systems, and The Center for Intelligent Maintenance. A portion of the background research for this work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under award number CSR 1544678.
Author Contributions: J.M. conceived of, conducted the background research for, and wrote the manuscript. J.I. contributed to the discussion in Section 3.4 and provided some of the algorithm references. A large portion of this article is a literature survey with contribution indicated through reference.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Abbreviations The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:

AAKR AI ANN APC BD CPS EHM ERP EWMA FC FD FDC GTM HMM IoT k-NN LR MES MVA NG-FDC PCA PdM PLS R2R ROC RUL SM SME SOM SPC SVM TTF

Auto-Associative Kernel Regression Artificial Intelligence Artificial Neural Network Advanced Process Control Big Data Cyber-Physical System Equipment Health Monitoring Enterprise Resource Planning Exponentially Weighted Moving Average Fault Classification Fault Detection Fault Detection and Classification Generative Topographic Mapping Hidden Markov Model Internet of Things k-Nearest Neighbors Linear Regression Manufacturing Execution System Multivariate Analysis Next Generation Fault Detection and Classification Principal Component Analysis Predictive Maintenance Partial Least Squares or Project on Latent Structures Run-to-Run (control) Receiver Operating Characteristic Remaining Useful Life Smart Manufacturing Subject Matter Expertise Self-Organizing Map Statistical Process Control Support Vector Machines Time To Failure

Processes 2017, 5, 39

18 of 20

UVA VM

Univariate Analysis Virtual Metrology

References
1. Wikipedia: Smart Manufacturing. Available online: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smart_manufacturing (accessed on 1 June 2017).
2. Davis, J.; Edgar, T.; Porter, J.; Bernaden, J.; Sarli, M. Smart manufacturing, manufacturing intelligence and demand-dynamic performance. Comput. Chem. Eng. 2012, 47, 145­156. [CrossRef]
3. Lee, J.; Kao, H.A.; Yang, S. Service Innovation and smart analytics for industry 4.0 and big data environment. Proced. Cirp 2014, 16, 3­8. [CrossRef]
4. Thoben, K.-D.; Wiesner, S.; Wuest, T. "Industrie 4.0" and smart manufacturing--A review of research issues and application examples. Int. J. Autom. Technol. 2017, 11, 4­16. [CrossRef]
5. Kagermann, H.; Wahlster, W. Industrie 4.0: Smart Manufacturing for the Future; Germany Trade and Invest: Berlin, Germany, 2016.
6. Moyne, J.; Iskandar, J.; Armacost, M. Big Data Analytics Applied to Semiconductor Manufacturing. In Proceedings of the AIChE 3rd Annual Big Data Analytics Conference, San Antonio, TX, USA, 28 March 2017.
7. Romero-Torres, S.; Moyne, J.; Kidambi, M. Towards Pharma 4.0; Leveraging Lessons and Innovation from Silicon Valley. American Pharmaceutical Review, 5 February 2017. Available online: http://www.americanpharmaceuticalreview.com/Featured-Articles/333897-Towards-Pharma-40-Leveraging-Lessons-and-Innovation-from-Silicon-Valley/ (accessed on 1 June 2017).
8. Evans, P. Initiatives for Applying Smart Manufacturing to the Continuous Processing Industries. Available online: https://www.aiche.org/sites/default/files/community/291721/aiche-community-sitepage/315581/initiativesforapplyingsmartmanufacturingtothecontinuous-rev1.pdf (accessed on 1 June 2017).
9. Handy, J. What's It Like in a Semiconductor Fab. Forbes 2011. Available online: https://www.forbes.com/ sites/jimhandy/2011/12/19/whats-it-like-in-a-semiconductor-fab/#2ecf8c9745ef (accessed on 1 June 2017).
10. May, G.S.; Spanos, C.J. Fundamentals of Semiconductor Manufacturing and Process Control; IEEE, Wiley-Interscience: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2006.
11. Sarfaty, M.; Shanmugasundram, A.; Schwarm, A. Advance Process Control solutions for Semiconductor Manufacturing. In Proceedings of the IEEE Advanced Semiconductor Manufacturing Conference, Boston, MA, USA, 30 April 2002.
12. Moyne, J. Introduction to and Practical Application of APC: A Tutorial. In Proceedings of the Advanced Process Control Conference XXVII, Phoenix, AZ, USA, 17­20 October 2016.
13. Moyne, J.; Del Castillo, E.; Hurwitz, A. Run-to-Run Control in Semiconductor Manufacturing; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2000.
14. Dimond, K.; Nowalk, T.; Yelverton, M. Implementing and Assessing the Value of Factory-Wide Fault Detection Deployment at a High Volume Foundry. In Proceedings of the Advanced Process Control Symposium XV, XXX, Colorado Springs, CO, USA, 9­12 September 2003.
15. Moyne, J. A Blueprint for Enterprise-Wide Deployment of APC. In Proceedings of the Advanced Process Control Symposium XXI, XXX, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, 27­30 September 2009.
16. Hu, C. 3D FinFET and other sub-22nm transistors. In Proceedings of the 19th IEEE International Symposium on the Physical and Failure Analysis of Integrated Circuits (IPFA), Marina Bay Sands, Singapore, 2­6 July 2012.
17. Hasserjian, K. Emerging Trends in IC Manufacturing Analytics and Decision Making. Keynote. In Proceedings of the Advanced Process Control Conference XXVII, Phoenix, AZ, USA, 17­20 October 2016.
18. International Roadmap for Devices and Systems (IRDS): Beyond CMOS (Emerging Research Device) White Paper, 2016 Edition. Available online: http://irds.ieee.org/images/files/pdf/2016_BC.pdf (accessed on 1 June 2017).
19. International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS): Factory Integration Chapter, 2016 Edition. Available online: www.itrs2.net (accessed on 1 June 2017).

Processes 2017, 5, 39

19 of 20

20. International Roadmap for Devices and Systems (IRDS): Factory Integration White Paper, 2016 Edition. Available online: http://irds.ieee.org/images/files/pdf/2016_FI.pdf (accessed on 1 June 2017).
21. Moyne, J. International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS) Factory Integration, 2015: Summary of Updates and Deep Dive Into Big Data Enhancements. In Proceedings of the APC Conference XXVII, Austin, TX, USA, 12­14 October 2015.
22. Rebooting the IT Revolution: A Call to Action; Semiconductor Industry Association and Semiconductor Research Corporation: Washington, DC, USA, 4 January 2016. Available online: https://www.src.org/ newsroom/press-release/2016/758/ (accessed on 1 June 2017).
23. Big Data Standards. Available online: http://bigdata.ieee.org/standards (accessed on 1 June 2017). 24. SEMI E133-1014: Specification for Automated Process Control Systems Interface. Semiconductor
Equipment and Materials International, 2014. Available online: http://www.semi.org/en/Standards/ StandardsPublications (accessed on 1 June 2017). 25. Lopez, F.; Saez, M.; Shao, Y.; Balta, E.C.; Moyne, J.; Mao, Z.M.; Barton, K.; Tilbury, D. Categorization of anomalies in smart manufacturing systems to support the selection of detection mechanisms. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 2017, 2, 1885­1892. [CrossRef] 26. Wuest, T. Identifying Product and Process state Drivers in Manufacturing Systems Using Supervised Machine Learning; Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2015. 27. Wuest, T.; Irgens, C.; Thoben, K.-D. An approach to quality monitoring in manufacturing using supervised machine learning on product state data. J. Intell. Manuf. 2014, 25, 1167­1180. [CrossRef] 28. Johnson, R.A.; Wichern, D.W. Applied Multivariate Statistical Analysis; Pearson Education International: London, UK, 2002. 29. Moyne, J.; Schulze, B.; Iskandar, J.; Armacost, M. Next Generation Advanced Process Control: Leveraging Big Data and Prediction. In Proceedings of the 27th Annual Advanced Semiconductor Manufacturing Conference (ASMC 2016), Saratoga Springs, NY, USA, 16­19 May 2016. 30. Iskandar, J.; Moyne, J.; Subrahmanyam, K.; Hawkins, P.; Armacost, M. Predictive Maintenance in Semiconductor Manufacturing: Moving to Fab-Wide Solutions. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual Advanced Semiconductor Manufacturing Conference (ASMC 2015), Saratoga Springs, NY, USA, 3­6 May 2015. 31. Ma, J.; Perkins, S. Time-Series Novelty Detection Using One-Class Support Vector Machines. In Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, Portland, OR, USA, 20­24 July 2003. 32. Hautamaki, V.; Karkkainen, I.; Franti, P. Outlier Detection Using k-Nearest Neighbour Graph. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Pattern Recognition, Cambridge, UK, 23­26 August 2004; pp. 430­433. 33. Markou, M.; Singh, S. Novelty detection: A review--Part 2: Neural network based approaches. Signal Process. 2003, 83, 2499­2521. [CrossRef] 34. Markou, M.; Singh, S. Novelty detection: A review--Part 1: Statistical approaches. Signal Process. 2003, 83, 2481­2497. [CrossRef] 35. Wang, J.; He, Q.P.; Edgar, T.F. State estimation in high-mix semiconductor manufacturing. J. Process Control 2009, 19, 443­456. [CrossRef] 36. Khan, A.; Moyne, J.; Tilbury, D. Fab-wide control utilizing virtual metrology. IEEE Trans. Semicond. Manuf. Spec. Issue Adv. Process Control 2007, 20, 364­375. [CrossRef] 37. Cheng, F.-T.; Kao, C.-A.; Chen, C.-F.; Tsai, W.-H. Tutorial on applying the VM technology for TFT-LCD manufacturing. IEEE Trans. Semicond. Manuf. 2015, 28, 55­69. 38. Kidambi, M.; Krishnaswamy, S.; Marteney, S.; Moyne, J.; Norman, D.; Webb, J. Improving Lithography Throughput and Minimizing Waste Using Predictive Multi-area Scheduling. In Proceedings of the SPIE Metrology Inspection, and Process Control for Microlithography XXV Conference, San Jose, CA, USA, 29 March 2012. 39. Moyne, J.; Schulze, B. Yield management enhanced advanced process control system (YMeAPC): Part I, description and case study of feedback for optimized multi-process control. IEEE Trans. Semicond. Manuf. Spec. Issue Adv. Process Control 2010, 23, 221­235. [CrossRef] 40. Geladi, P.; Kowalski, B.R. Partial least-squares regression: A tutorial. Anal. Chim. Acta 1986, 185, 1­17. [CrossRef] 41. Drucker, H.; Burges, C.J.C.; Kaufman, L.; Smola, A.; Vapnik, V. Support vector regression machines, advances in neural information processing systems 9. 1997, 9, 155­161. 42. Kohonen, T. The self-organizing map. Neurocomputing 1998, 21, 1­6. [CrossRef]

Processes 2017, 5, 39

20 of 20

43. Bishop, C.; Svensén, M.; Williams, C.K.I. GTM: The generative topographic mapping. Neural Comput. 1998, 10, 215­234. [CrossRef]
44. Rabiner, L.; Juang, B. An Introduction to hidden markov models. IEEE ASSP Mag. 1986, 3, 4­16. [CrossRef] 45. Kennedy, J.; Eberhart, R. Particle Swarm Optimization. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
on Neural Networks, Perth, WA, Australia, 27 November­1 December 1995. 46. Integrated Measurement Association (IMA) APC Council Meeting Minutes: October 2015 Meeting. Available
online: http://info.cimetrix.com/blog/default-blog/blog/2015_advanced_process_control_conference (accessed on 1 June 2017). 47. Chao, J.; Di, Y.; Moyne, J.; Iskandar, J.; Hao, H.; Schulze, B.; Armacost, M.; Lee, J. Extensible framework for pattern recognition-augmented feature extraction (PRAFE) in robust prognostics and health monitoring. In Preparation for Submission to IEEE Trans. Semicond. Manuf. 48. Ho, T.; Wang, W.; Villareal, G.; Hall, C.; McCormick, E. Dynamic Full Trace FDC. In Proceedings of the Advanced Process Control Conference XXVII, Phoenix, AZ, USA, 17­20 October 2016. 49. Hanley, J.A.; McNeil, B.J. The meaning and use of the area under a receiver operating characteristic (roc) curve. Radiology 1982, 143, 29­36. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 50. Moyne, J. Method and Apparatus for Optimizing Profit in Predictive Systems. U.S. Patent 20,150,105,895, 5 February 2015. 51. Iskandar, J.; Moyne, J. Maintenance of Virtual Metrology Models. In Proceedings of the 27th Annual Advanced Semiconductor Manufacturing Conference (ASMC 2016), Saratoga Springs, NY, USA, 16­19 May 2016. 52. Wikipedia: Apache_Hadoop. Available online: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apache_Hadoop (accessed on 1 June 2017). 53. Moyne, J.; Samantaray, J.; Armacost, M. Big data capabilities applied to semiconductor manufacturing advanced process control. IEEE Trans. Semicond. Manuf. 2016, 29, 283­291. [CrossRef] 54. Wikipedia: Artificial Intelligence. Available online: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Artificial_intelligence (accessed on 1 June 2017). 55. Najafabadi, M.N.; Villanustre, F.; Khoshgoftaar, T.M.; Seliya, N.; Wald, R.; Muharemagic, E. Deep learning applications and challenges in big data analytics. J. Big Data 2015, 2, 1. [CrossRef] 56. Lammers, D. Big data and neural networks: New drivers for the semiconductor industry. Nanochip Fab Solut. 2017, 12, submitted for publication. 57. Vogel-Walcutt, J.J.; Gebrim, J.B.; Bowers, C.; Carper, T.M.; Nicholson, D. Cognitive load theory vs. constructivist approaches: Which best leads to efficient, deep learning? J. Comput. Assist. Learn. 2011, 27, 133­145. [CrossRef] 58. Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) Program Solicitation NSF 10-515. Available online: https://www.nsf.gov/ pubs/2010/nsf10515/nsf10515.htm (accessed on 1 June 2017).
© 2017 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

