ENABLING WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING TECHNOLOGIES FOR EDGE COMPUTING
Edge Computing in IoT-Based Manufacturing
Baotong Chen, Jiafu Wan, Antonio Celesti, Di Li, Haider Abbas, and Qin Zhang

Abstract
Edge computing extends the capabilities of computation, network connection, and storage from the cloud to the edge of the network. It enables the application of business logic between the downstream data of the cloud service and the upstream data of the Internet of Things (IoT). In the field of Industrial IoT, edge computing provides added benefits of agility, real-time processing, and autonomy to create value for intelligent manufacturing. With the focus on the concept of edge computing, this article proposes an architecture of edge computing for IoT-based manufacturing. It also analyzes the role of edge computing from four aspects including edge equipment, network communication, information fusion, and cooperative mechanism with cloud computing. Finally, we give a case study to implement the active maintenance based on a prototype platform. This article aims to provide a technical reference for the deployment of edge computing in the smart factory.
Introduction
In the context of intelligent manufacturing, the proliferation of terminal network devices has given rise to new challenges for operation and maintenance, scalability, and reliability of the data centers. The growth of edge computing has moved the computing from centralized data centers to the periphery of the network. Edge computing aims to address these challenges by creating an open platform with the capability of integrating core capabilities such as networking, computing, storage, and application. It has enabled intelligent services close to the manufacturing unit to meet the key requirements such as agile connection, data analytics via edge nodes, highly responsive cloud services, and privacy-policy strategy [1, 2]. Edge computing can make full use of embedded computing capabilities of field devices to achieve equipment autonomy based on distributed information processing. Furthermore, edge computing supports the need of digital manufacturing enterprises for rapid configuration of the smart factory, which must adapt to personal demands of users and dynamic changes in production conditions.
Research on edge computing is progressing rapidly. Due to the limitation of the cloud platform, Lopez et al. [3] considered that edge computing is needed for moving the data and services from centralized nodes to the edge of the network. Patel et al. [4] outlined the novel approach of using the intelligent edge (e.g., Raspberry Pi)

for Internet of Things (IoT) data analytics. Its use case can be found in intelligent manufacturing. Condry et al. [5] introduced a model using smart edge IoT devices for safer, rapid response with industry IoT control operations. As IoT application to the industrial domain is spreading, Georgakopoulos et al. [6] proposed a roadmap combining cloud edge computing for IoT-based manufacturing. Suganuma et al. [7] proposed multiagent-based flexible edge computing architecture for a large-scale IoT system. Byers [8] provides a review of the architecture, use case, and requirements for fog-enabled IoT networks. Both of them are important references for the deployment of edge computing in IoT-based manufacturing. Satyanarayanan [9] pointed out that the emergence of edge computing has enabled the cloud services for mobile computing, scalability, and privacy policy. However, the reference architecture for IoT-based manufacturing has not yet been proposed. Edge computing and its role in the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) application should be established.
Industrial applications in the domain of IoT require characteristics such as location awareness and low latency. Edge computing, which is implemented at the peripheral devices on an IoT network, has the ability to support these requirements of mobility and geographic independence. Computing's physical proximity to a mobile device makes it easier to achieve low end-to-end latency, high bandwidth, and low jitter to services located at the network edge. Edge computing is being introduced into IoT-based manufacturing. The scope of edge computing extends the range of an IoT embedded device with capabilities of limited storage, cache, and processing to the edge near the terminal infrastructure (e.g., Raspberry Pi and Arduino board). The contributions of this article can be summarized as follows:
·In view of the typical applications of edge computing in the domains of intelligent manufacturing, this article proposes a novel system architecture from four perspectives: the device domain, the network domain, the data domain, and the application domain.
·With the focus on the development of edge-specific field devices, this article discusses how to achieve efficient information interaction, heterogeneous data fusion, and a cooperative mechanism with the cloud platform. Some related use cases are also presented for IoT-based manufacturing.
·Based on the typical characteristics of edge computing in IoT-based manufacturing, this

Baotong Chen, Jiafu Wan, Di Li, and Qin Zhang are with South China University of Technology; Antonio Celesti is with the University of Messina; Haider Abbas is with Florida Institute of Technology.

With the focus on the concept of edge computing, the authors propose an architecture of edge computing for IoT-based manufacturing. They analyze the role of edge computing from four aspects including edge equipment, network communication, information fusion, and cooperative mechanism with cloud computing. Finally, they give a case study to implement active maintenance based on a prototype platform.
Digital Object Identifier: 10.1109/MCOM.2018.1701231

IEEE Communications Magazine · September 2018

0163-6804/18/$25.00 © 2018 IEEE

103

Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgia Institute of Technology. Downloaded on February 03,2021 at 23:13:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Due to the lack of the flexible configurable middleware, it is challenging to implement a flexible adjustment to the equipment in order to cope with the changing manufacturing status. However, the popularity of IIoT requires a more open mode in the industrial field, especially for safe remote access, periodic maintenance, and industrial big data
analysis.

Data domain

Edge data storage
Full customization & integration capabilities

Edge computing
Data account & data analysis
Distributed intelligence

Digital twins

Controller
Networkmanagement

Route & data cache
Gateway

Device-to-edge Sensors-to-edge D2D data signal SDN-based interaction OPC UA C/S transfer
Smart factory
OPC UA client

Network domain

Sensors, actuators, & control

Operation Sensors
Operation equipment

Autonomy
Smart node
Local activities

Security
Real-time monitor
Workpiece process

Perception
RFID RFID reader
Products parts

D2D Application domain

Figure 1. Architecture of an edge computing platform in IoT-based manufacturing.

research develops a laboratory prototype platform, and conducts experiments for the active maintenance of equipment in smart factory. The experiments demonstrate the advantages of edge computing for business agility and bandwidth optimization.
The rest of the article is organized as follows. We propose a system architecture for the application of edge computing in IoT-based manufacturing. We present the role of edge computing in manufacturing scenarios involving devices, networks, data, and the manufacturing cloud. We present the combination of edge computing with the typical industrial applications to achieve active maintenance of the production line. The final section concludes our work.
System Architecture
With the goal of proposing a novel application scenario for edge computing, we present the system architecture of edge computing in an IoTbased manufacturing scenario. As shown in Fig. 1, the architecture is divided into four fields: the device domain, the network domain, the data domain, and the application domain.
·The device domain is either embedded in, or located close to, the field devices such as sensors, meters, robots, and machine tools. The device domain should support a flexible communication infrastructure and be able to establish standardized communication models to support various types of communication protocols. Nodes in an edge computing network must have the ability to compute and store data to dynamically adjust the execution strategy of the industrial equipment based on sensor inputs. The information model is built on the edge computing nodes, and includes mainstream protocols such as OLE for Process Control Unified Architecture (OPC UA) [10] and Data Distributed Service (DDS). It is deployed to realize the unified semantics of information interaction, and ensure data security and privacy.

·The network domain connects the field equipment to the data platform in a flat manner. In IoT-based manufacturing, the network domain uses software defined networking (SDN) [11] to achieve separation between the network transmission and the control. Due to the necessary time sensitivity of the task data, a time-sensitive network (TSN) protocol is applied to process the sequence of network information and to provide the general standards for maintaining and managing the sensitive time nodes.
·The data domain in the data origin provides services such as data cleaning and feature extraction, which improves the availability of the heterogeneous industrial data. This also allows the implementation of pre-defined responses that can be based on the real-time IoT data. The abstract data at the device terminal end is provided to the remote service center for the virtualization of the manufacturing resources.
·The application domain inherits the applications of the manufacturing cloud at the network edge. It integrates the key technologies among the network, data, computing, and control. The application domain enables edge computing to provide general, flexible, and interoperable intelligent applications. Components such as service composition, based on the requirements of the manufacturing process, allow the dynamic management and optimal scheduling of field equipment.
The device domain supports real-time interconnections and the deployment of intelligent applications to field devices. It provides an important foundation for the upper layers of the application. The network domain is useful for multiple purposes such as the real-time transmission of heterogeneous industrial data, the control of complex network states, and the convenient access to manufacturing resources. It provides a platform for performing inter-connection, information interaction, and data fusion on the edge comput-

104

IEEE Communications Magazine · September 2018

Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgia Institute of Technology. Downloaded on February 03,2021 at 23:13:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ing nodes. The data domain also provides data optimization services. One of its main tasks is to ensure consistency and integrity of the data. The application domain provides intelligent application services for edge computing, which allows the independent implementation of local business logic at the peripheral devices. The domain also provides open interfaces for the device domain and the network domain to realize edge industry application. The proposed edge computing architecture, presented in Fig. 1, makes full use of the embedded computing capabilities and ensures the autonomy of the system and the manufacturing equipment while following a distributed computing paradigm. Furthermore, the edge computing framework cooperates with the remote data center to realize intelligent terminals for the manufacturing system.
The Roles of Edge Computing in
IoT-Based Manufacturing
In view of the dimensions of the manufacturing system, edge computing can be located either at the equipment level, at the control level, or at the workshop level. It may support individual stages such as system integration, interconnection, information fusion, or the entire life cycle of the manufacturing process. The deployment of edge computing transforms the system to allow flexibility in adapting to changes in the resources of the production line, which can in turn promote the development for IoT-based manufacturing.
Edge-Specific Device Supporting
Network Middleware
The whole IoT-based manufacturing architecture is like a pyramid that can be simply divided into the device layer, the control layer, and the network layer. There is a strong interaction between the underlying manufacturing equipment and the affiliated services. Due to the lack of flexible configurable middleware, it is challenging to implement flexible adjustment to the equipment in order to cope with the changing manufacturing status. However, the popularity of IIoT requires a more open mode in the industrial field, especially for safe remote access, periodic maintenance, and industrial big data analysis. The emergence of edge computing attempts to deal with this challenge by transforming the computing model of intelligent manufacturing from a centralized control model to a distributed processing model. Additionally, the edge computing nodes support the plug and play of new equipment and rapid replacement in case of failure. One challenge in the IIoT framework is the ubiquitous compatibility problem due to the existence of a diverse number of protocols. Therefore, to deal with this diversity, edge computing nodes provide multiple access modes within their modular network interfaces. Furthermore, the format of transmission payload is modified to adapt to different communication protocols and to facilitate easy information exchange between the equipment. It also allows the flexible adjustment of production plans, and supports rapid deployments of new processes.
Edge computing improves the terminal intelligence of manufacturing equipment. The goal is to not only allow the IIoT devices to perform

Wireless access point
D2D communication

(eNB) Edge router

OPC UA communication

Edge gateway

Switchboard Web server

Data server

Service server

D2D transfer signal OPC-based transfer
TCP/IP networks Request signal

Figure 2. Efficient information interaction in IoT-based manufacturing.

Application Process visibility

Fault prediction

Digital twins

Edge support

Data fusion Multi-device data acquisition
Semantic interoperability

Deployment of algorithms for MA or AI
Fault detection standard

Definition of basic functionality of edge computing nodes

Field device

Actuator

Sensor

DCS

Edge nodes
Raspberry pie board

Arduino board

Figure 3. Architecture of an edge-enhanced data fusion system.

business logic analysis and autonomous computing, but also to give them the capability to optimize and adjust their execution strategies in real time. Edge computing nodes also make it possible to implement active maintenance at the edge of IIoT. It enables the acquisition of realtime and accurate state of the equipment. In the same way, some of the diagnostic tasks run on the manufacturing cloud can be offloaded to the edge computing nodes, which decreases the time delay needed in performing these diagnoses, and enables proactive maintenance. This decreases the maintenance time and reduces the application monitoring pressure of manufacturing cloud. In general, edge computing nodes are integrated into IIoT, making the embedded control more powerful and improving the scalability of the network.
Edge-Enhanced Information Interaction
IIoT is deployed to achieve seamless communication between manufacturing resources and different control systems. Edge computing in IIoT systems provides important support for the applications at the network edge. As shown in Fig. 2, the OPC UA provides protocols and services [10], which helps to realize an integrated information model independent of the network

IEEE Communications Magazine · September 2018

105

Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgia Institute of Technology. Downloaded on February 03,2021 at 23:13:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Cloud computing

Big data analysis

Cooperation framework

Edge computing

Low jitter

High bandwidth

Manufacturing cloud
-+ ARDUINO
Edge gateway

Knowledge mining Edge cloud services
Low latency

Network edge device

Sensors

PLC Smart meter

Zigbee

RFID

Figure 4. Cooperation mechanism in IoT-based manufacturing.

Robot

PLC

Raspberry Pi
Not packed candy box
Industrial device driver
Figure 5. A prototype platform with edge computing equipment for IoT-based manufacturing.
facilities. This allows the system to achieve ubiquitous perception and semantic interoperability of manufacturing resources. Edge computing nodes are being implemented to the smart factory for the fast configuration of the OPC UA technology. The server of OPC UA can be built with edge computing nodes, thus removing the infrastructure obstacles that are present in traditional manufacturing equipment. The emergence of the application of information technologies (e.g., SDN and network functions virtualization) in intelligent manufacturing has helped to break the limitation of traditional network architecture. These systems therefore meet the requirements of IIoT by providing massive connections, automatic operation and maintenance, and advanced network security policies [11, 12]. The deployment of edge computing is generally in the form of a virtual machine or a software container on the gateway, which decouples network connections and supports third-party applications. While SDN makes the industrial network highly reconfigurable, it cannot meet the requirement of low latency. Recently, time-sensitive networks (TSNs) have been suggested as a new solution for real-time IIoT. It is a set of protocol clusters located at the data link

layer to decrease the network uncertainty of the underlying architecture. Edge computing is introduced in these scenarios to act as the time-aware scheduler. It ensures that the network is sensitive to the time factor requirements of the different data tasks. Edge computing provides real-time performance on the time node and processes sequences of information interaction.
Mobile edge computing (MEC) is a networking application and edge service based on intelligent interaction at the equipment terminal. The deployment strategy of MEC has the advantages of low latency, high bandwidth, and a lightweight network. MEC has the ability to provide more accurate services in real time by accessing wireless network information and location information [13]. In addition, device-to-device (D2D) communication technology has also been extended to the industrial field [14]. This allows convenient resource allocation by means of the base station in the smart factory. Mobile equipment can interact with each other through the wireless network infrastructure. Furthermore, in the case of no network coverage, devices can piggyback their connections off nearby devices, which can form local subnetworks, and then access the core network through these intermediate connections.
Edge-Enhanced Data Fusion and Advanced Analytics
Fusion of different types and sources of data is an important step for data acquisition and intelligent control in the management of complex industrial processes. Edge computing can enhance the capability of data fusion at the network edge. Figure 3 shows the architecture of an edge-enhanced data fusion framework. Edge computing can make full use of the sensor resources at the peripheral network devices. The complementary and redundant information obtained from the sensors in space and time are combined according to pre-defined optimization criteria and algorithms. This improves the consistency of the interpretation and the analysis of the detected event. Based on a knowledge base, a self-learning mechanism can perform dynamic reasoning and generate responses. Edge computing nodes can be deployed to extract features from the sensor signals by applying techniques such as time series analysis, frequency analysis, and wavelet analysis. An artificial intelligence (AI) or machine learning (ML) model can be run on the edge computing nodes to utilize the characteristic data to make predictions and to subsequently update the knowledge base. Dynamic reasoning at the edge can be performed according to the updated knowledge and received data. This allows intelligent decision making at the network edge.
The implementation of fine-grained data acquisition is easy to realize at the peripheral equipment, and the different streams of the original data can be directly fused. The fused data is more informative and synthetic than the original inputs. It is possible to provide IoT-based computational resources in a similar vein as the operating system or software containers offered on the edge nodes. The manufacturing process can be visualized based on advanced data visualization technologies. This would allow the system to forecast failures and perform active maintenance. Additionally, detection devices are used to collect all

106

IEEE Communications Magazine · September 2018

Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgia Institute of Technology. Downloaded on February 03,2021 at 23:13:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The time length of robots operation (h) The average upload speed of backbone
network speed (Mbps)

Centralized task scheduling mechanism

45

Self-organized task scheduling mechanism

35

25

15
6.3 5 6.1 500

11.2 10.2
800

26.4

16.8

20.5

20.1

1500

2000

(a)

20

45.6

18

39.5

16

35.2

14

30.6

12

10

8

6

4

2

Centralized task scheduling mechanism

Self-organized task scheduling mechanism

0

2500

3000

0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 5 20 40 80 120 200 400

(b)

Figure 6. Experimental results of the equipment scheduling mechanisms: a) order quantity in a candy packing line; b) running time of the candy packing line (min).

the equipment execution data, extract features based on the data fusion strategies implemented at the edge computing, and abstract the functions of the equipment to construct a digital twin of the intelligent equipment. From the perspective of each server, edge computing mainly implements intelligent local distribution of computing resources in the IIoT. It maps the intelligent equipment in virtualized manufacturing environments and supports data centers to build digital plants. The digital twins can then be used for direct product manufacturing, process optimization, and cost reduction.
Cooperation Mechanism between
Cloud Computing and Edge Computing
The combination between cloud computing and edge computing enables the digital transformation of manufacturing. As shown in Fig. 4, such a cooperation mechanism can be described as follows.
·Since the focus of the system is on providing real-time or short-term data analysis, edge computing can better support the real-time processing and performance evaluation of local businesses. This reduces network pressure, and improves data security and privacy protection.
·Cloud computing, on the other hand, does not focus on real-time or short-cycle data analysis. Its focus is to implement big data analysis and knowledge mining from the data obtained from edge computing networks. It plays an important role in periodic maintenance, decision support, and other activities that do not necessarily need to be performed in real time.
·Since edge computing is performed close to the execution unit, the edge computing nodes act as collection units of heterogeneous data and move complex optimization problems to the cloud. They supply the cloud computing frameworks with the necessary high value data that can better support the cloud application (e.g., big data analysis). The decision model through the optimization of the business rules can be established on the edge nodes for improving the efficiency and performance of the cloud.
As the number of sensors embedded in devices increases, the amount of data grows exponentially. Implementing real-time control loop feedback becomes more complex, and the analysis of all the data streams to generate decisions becomes more time-consuming. Extend-

ing the requirements for processing capacity on the cloud is extremely time- and cost-intensive. However, edge computing makes it easier to implement cloud services with low latency, high bandwidth, and low jitter. The cloud platform can be a tremendous tool for the smart factory to process massive data. For instance, it provides a scientific basis for production scheduling and market demand forecast. The framework of cloud computing can be used to dispatch and distribute edge computing nodes according to global operational requirements, to equip IIoT nodes with edge decision capabilities. Meanwhile, the task of the edge computing nodes is to provide local data storage. In the case of connection failures to the cloud (e.g., power failure), the data can temporarily be cached at the edge. Once the connection is restored, the locally stored data is optimized and automatically synchronized with the cloud, which ensures full mapping of the equipment.
A Case Study: Active Maintenance
Edge computing can bring significant advantages in terms of efficiency and cost reduction in Industry 4.0. In fact, activities such as active maintenance are being migrated to the network edge to create novel industrial applications, which are changing the service mode. In the case study, we build distributed data processing in the cloud using Hadoop architecture. The Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS) and Hadoop MapReduce were used to perform realtime data analysis and data mining of the local database. The big data consisted of machine status data and machine log data. All the data is combined to generate a reasoning model, which is loaded on a local Linux system of a Raspberry Pi. An OPC UA server on Raspberry Pi is applied to vendor-neutral transmission of pre-processing information, or raw data from a programmable logic controller (PLC) with safety and reliability. A semantic model is also built to integrate multiple data sources to produce more consistent, accurate, and useful information. This data fusion technology is used to input the acquired data feature to the reasoning model.
In our laboratory, a variety of customized candy products are packed in the production line. Customer order service is provided using a private cloud. An ad hoc network between the edge computing nodes is implemented to realize highspeed and stable communication. The integra-

IEEE Communications Magazine · September 2018

107

Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgia Institute of Technology. Downloaded on February 03,2021 at 23:13:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Edge computing is a new computing paradigm that allows the integration of core capabilities such as network, computing, and storage closer to the peripheral equipment. The application of edge computing in IIoT meets the requirements of real time for lightweight intelligent manufacturing, and increases the agility and security of
the network.

tion of the Ethernet with DDS standard protocol is deployed to achieve efficient information interaction. As shown in Fig. 5, the robots get candy packing tasks associated with the cloud, then suck the selected candy and put it into the not packed candy box. During the operation, the robots are represented as network nodes in the backbone network. If any node is overloaded or fails, the task of that node will be switched to an adjacent node. Therein, a multi-agent system is introduced to enhance the autonomous negotiation capability in the smart factory. In this way, each robot can be regarded as an agent. The activities of an agent are autonomous and independent. Their own goals and actions are not restricted by others. The multi-agent system is employed to complete the production tasks with the task procedures assigned to different agents, and we introduce Contract Net Protocol (CNP) [15] to allocate each task through the open tender, bidding, and winning modes. The agents negotiate and resolve the conflicts by means of competition and consultation. Thus, the order task completed in the self-organized task mechanism. On the contrary, the instructions to a subordinate robot are distributed by the central server. This may lead to execution delay and network congestion by the centralized task scheduling mechanism. In this way, the cloud platform actually does not apply in this case. The comparisons between the self-organized task mechanism and the centralized task scheduling mechanism are presented as follows.
For a given order quantity, we compared the operating time between the self-organized task mechanism and the centralized task scheduling mechanism. As shown in Fig. 6a, for an increase in the order quantity, the experimental results show that the self-organized task mechanism based on edge computing is more agile and efficient, especially after 2000 orders. Additionally, as shown in Fig. 6b, we used an Internet speed meter to compare the bandwidth of the core network for the two mechanisms. When the production line was stable, the speed of the production line backbone network based on the centralized task scheduling mechanism was 16~17 Mb/s. Once the Raspberry Pi devices were deployed, the speed of the backbone network based on the self-organized task scheduling mechanism was between 5~6 Mb/s. This showed an overall 60 percent reduction in network speed. The proposed self-organized task scheduling mechanism focuses on the dynamic scheduling problem for IoT-based manufacturing. In this case study, Raspberry Pi as the edge computing node has enough processing ability for data fusion and cooperation with working partners. Cloud services can be transferred to the network edge. The service delay is reduced, and the transmission of large amounts of data is avoided. This is the device domain and data domain application of edge computing in the reference architecture. Furthermore, edge computing will play an important role in IoT-based manufacturing, such as thermal sensors, SDN, and network security.
Conclusions
Edge computing is a new computing paradigm that allows the integration of core capabilities such as network, computing, and storage closer to the peripheral equipment. The application of

edge computing in IIoT meets the requirements of real time for lightweight intelligent manufacturing, and increases the agility and security of the network. This article presents a system architecture for implementing edge computing in IIoT applications. The role of edge computing for IoT-based manufacturing is analyzed. The final experiments show that the self-organized task scheduling mechanism with edge computing provides obvious advantages in terms of business agility and bandwidth optimization compared to traditional approaches. Furthermore, as the computational capabilities in the cloud do not include increased response latency or network security, even limited computing resources deployed at the network edge will help in the service quality of industrial use cases in IoTbased manufacturing.
Acknowledgment
Dr. Jiafu Wan is the corresponding author. All of the authors contributed equally to this work. This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2017YFE0101000), the Science and Technology Program of Guangzhou, China (No. 201802030005), the Science and Technology Planning Project of Guangdong Province (No. 2017B090913002), and the Key Program of the Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province (No. 2017B030311008).
References
[1] W. Shi and S. Dustdar, "The Promise of Edge Computing," Computer, vol. 49, no. 5, 2016, pp. 78­81.
[2] M. Mukherjee et al., "Security and Privacy in Fog Computing: Challenges," IEEE Access, vol. 5, 2017, pp. 19,293­19,304.
[3] P. G. Lopez et al., "Edge-Centric Computing: Vision and Challenges," ACM Sigcomm Comp. Commun. Rev., vol. 45, no. 5, 2015, pp. 37­42.
[4] P. Patel, M. I. Ali, and A. Sheth, "On Using the Intelligent Edge for IoT Analytics," IEEE Intelligent Systems, vol. 32, no. 5, 2017, pp. 64­69.
[5] M. W. Condry and C. B. Nelson, "Using Smart Edge IoT Devices for Safer, Rapid Response with Industry IoT Control Operations," Proc. IEEE, vol. 104, no. 5, 2016, pp. 938­46.
[6] D. Georgakopoulos et al., "Internet of Things and Edge Cloud Computing Roadmap for Manufacturing," IEEE Cloud Computing, vol. 3, no. 4, 2016, pp. 66­73.
[7] T. Suganuma et al., "Multiagent-Based Flexible Edge Computing Architecture for IoT," IEEE Network, vol. 32, no. 1, Jan./ Feb. 2018, pp. 16­23.
[8] C. C. Byers, "Architectural Imperatives for Fog Computing: Use Cases, Requirements, and Architectural Techniques for Fog-Enabled IoT Networks," IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 55, no. 8, Aug. 2017, pp. 14­20.
[9] M. Satyanarayanan, "The Emergence of Edge Computing," Computer, vol. 50, no. 1, 2017, pp. 30­39.
[10] A. Giirbea et al., "Design and Implementation of an OLE for Process Control Unified Architecture Aggregating Server for A Group of Flexible Manufacturing Systems," Software Lett., vol. 5, no. 4, 2011, pp. 406­14.
[11] M. Imran et al., "Software-Defined Optical Burst Switching for HPC and Cloud Computing Data Centers," IEEE/OSA J. Optical Commun. & Net., vol. 8, no. 8, 2016, pp. 610­20.
[12] J. Wan et al., "Software-Defined Industrial Internet of Things in the Context of Industry 4.0," IEEE Sensors J., vol. 16, no. 20, 2016, pp. 7373­80.
[13] J. Liu et al., "A Scalable and Quick-Response Software Defined Vehicular Network Assisted by Mobile Edge Computing," IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 55, no. 7, July 2017, pp. 94­100.
[14] E. Ahmed et al., "Social-Aware Resource Allocation and Optimization for D2D Communication," IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 24, no. 3, June 2017, pp. 122­29.
[15] S. Wang et al., "Towards Smart Factory for Industry 4.0: A Self-Organized Multi-Agent System with Big Data Based Feedback and Coordination," Computer Networks, vol. 101, 2016, pp. 158­68.

108

IEEE Communications Magazine · September 2018

Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgia Institute of Technology. Downloaded on February 03,2021 at 23:13:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Biographies
Baotong Chen (boxuan234@sina.com) received his B.A. degree in mechanical engineering from Nanyang Institute of Technology, China, in 2014. He is currently pursuing a Ph.D.degree in the School of Mechanical and Automotive Engineering, South China University of Technology (SCUT). His research interests include cyber-physical systems, industrial wireless networks, the Internet of Things, and embedded control systems.
Jiafu Wan (jiafuwan_76@163.com) has been a professor in the School of Mechanical & Automotive Engineering,SCUT since September 2015. Thus far, he has published more than 150 scientific papers, including 90+ SCI-indexed papers, 30+ IEEE transactions/journal papers, 14 ESI Highly Cited Papers, and 4 ESI Hot Papers. His research interests include cyber-physical systems, Industry 4.0, smart factory, industrial big data, and industrial robots.
Antonio Celesti (acelesti@unime.it) is an adjunct professor and member of the Scientific Research Organizational Unit at the University of Messina, Italy. He received his Ph.D. in advanced technology for information engineering in 2012 from the University of Messina. He is a co-author of more than 130 papers published in international journals, conference proceedings, and

books. His main research interests include distributed systems, cloud computing, and IoT service federation and security.
Di Li (itdili@scut.edu.cn) is a professor in the School of Mechanical and Automotive Engineering, SCUT. She has directed 50+ research projects, including ones funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China, among others. Thus far, she has authored/co-authored 180+ scientific papers. Her research interests include embedded systems, computer vision, and cyber-physical systems.
Haider Abbas [SM](dr.h.abbas@ieee.org) is a cyber security professional who received professional training and certifications from Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Stockholm University, Sweden, IBM, and EC-Council. His professional career consists of activities ranging from R&D and industry consultations, through multi-national research projects, research fellowships, doctoral advisory services, international journal editorships, conferences chairmanships, and invited/keynote speaker.
Qin Zhang (cszhangq@scut.edu.cn) received her Ph.D. degree from SCUT in 2013. She is currently a lecturer with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, SCUT. Her research interests include embedded systems, industrial robotics, pattern recognition, and image analysis.

IEEE Communications Magazine · September 2018

109

Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgia Institute of Technology. Downloaded on February 03,2021 at 23:13:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

