SIGIR 2013 Workshop on Time Aware Information Access (#TAIA2013)

Fernando Diaz fdiaz@microsoft.com
Kira Radinsky kira@salespredict.com

Susan Dumais sdumais@microsoft.com

Miles Efron mefron@illinois.edu

Maarten de Rijke derijke@uva.nl

Milad Shokouhi milads@microsoft.com

ABSTRACT

on evaluation and on the collaborative benchmarking activ-

Web content increasingly reflects the current state of the

ities that are happening this year:

physical and social world, manifested both in traditional news media sources along with user-generated publishing sites such as Twitter, Foursquare, and Facebook. At the

· Temporal summarization (or works in progress for the TREC 2013 task).

same time, web searching increasingly reflects problems grounded · Real-time search (or works in progress for the TREC

in the real world. As a result of this blending of the web with

2013 task), including, real-time trends in social cir-

the real world, we observe that the web, both in its composi-

cles, real time events vs. real time queries, aggregated

tion and use, has incorporated many of the dynamics of the

search answers for real-time searches, and other related

real world. Few of the problems associated with searching

issues.

dynamic collections are well understood, such as defining time-sensitive relevance, understanding user query behavior over time and understanding why certain web content changes.

· Dynamic information extraction and updating (or works in progress for TREC 2013 Knowledge Base Acceleration (KBA) and Temporal Summarization tracks).

We believe that, just as static collections often benefit from modeling topics, dynamic collections will likely benefit from temporal modeling of events and time-sensitive user interests and intents, which were rarely addressed in the literature. There have been preliminary efforts in the research and industrial communities to address algorithms, architectures, evaluation methodologies and metrics.

Research questions include: How can these tasks be approached? Are they measuring the right thing? What do they teach us? What is missing?
In addition, TAIA 2013 solicited contributions on the following issues that complement today's benchmarking activities and that may inform future versions of these activities:

We aim to bring together practitioners and researchers to

· Publicly available dynamic collections (e.g. Wikipedia

discuss their recent breakthroughs and the challenges with

edits, Wikipedia page requests, Twitter and news streams).

addressing time-aware information access, both from the algorithmic and the architectural perspectives.

· Evaluation methodologies for time-sensitive tasks.

This workshop is a successor to the successful SIGIR 2012 Workshop on Time Aware Information Access (#TAIA2012).1

· Timeline creations and summarizations

Where the 2012 edition was the first to bring together a

· Temporal natural language processing tasks and tech-

broad set of academic and industrial researchers around the

niques

topic of time-aware information access, the specific focus of this workshop is on the many time-aware benchmarking activities that are ongoing in 2013.

· Time-sensitive ranking, including, effective ranking for time-sensitive queries, optimizing for both freshness and relevance, evaluating the results for time sensitive

1. SCOPE

queries, etc.

We solicited submissions related to all aspects of timesensitive information access. TAIA 2013 has a special focus
1http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/people/milads/ taia2012.aspx

· Temporal changes in document contents.
· Understanding Web dynamics, including trends and other temporal analysis on web and social graphs.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. SIGIR'13, July 28­August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland. ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

1137

