Session 7A: Social

SIGIR'17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Hierarchical Community-Level Information Di usion Modeling in Social Networks

Yuan Zhang
Department of Machine Intelligence Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE) Peking University, China yuan.z@pku.edu.cn

Tianshu Lyu
Department of Machine Intelligence Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE) Peking University, China lyutianshu@pku.edu.cn

Yan Zhang
Department of Machine Intelligence Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE) Peking University, China zhy@cis.pku.edu.cn

ABSTRACT
Recently, online social networks are becoming increasingly popular platforms for social interactions. Understanding how information propagates in such networks is important for personalization and recommendation in social search.
In this paper, we propose a Hierarchical Community-level Information Di usion (HCID) model to capture the information di usion process in social networks. We introduce the notion of users' topic popularity as to enable our model to depict the information di usion process which is both topic-aware (which topic the information is concerned with) and source-aware (where the information comes from). Instead of assuming homogeneity of social communities, we propose the notion of community hierarchy, where information di usion across inter-level communities is uni-directional from the higher levels to the lower ones.
We design a Gibbs sampling algorithm to infer model parameters and propose prediction methods for two information di usion prediction tasks, the retweet prediction and the cascade prediction. Comparison experiments are conducted on two real datasets. Results show that our model achieves substantial improvement compared with the existing work.
CCS CONCEPTS
·Applied computing Sociology; ·Human-centered computing Social networking sites; ·Information systems Data mining;
KEYWORDS
social networks; communities; information di usion
ACM Reference format: Yuan Zhang, Tianshu Lyu, and Yan Zhang. 2017. Hierarchical CommunityLevel Information Di usion Modeling in Social Networks. In Proceedings of SIGIR '17, August 7­11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan, , 10 pages. DOI: h p://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3077136.3080784
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for pro t or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the rst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permi ed. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speci c permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. SIGIR '17, August 7­11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan © 2017 ACM. 978-1-4503-5022-8/17/08. . . $15.00 DOI: h p://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3077136.3080784

Input:

Output:

relationship network and retweet log hierarchical community level diffusion

Lifestyle Politics
Sports
topic interests

influence strengths
LifestylSeports Politics
topic popularity

Figure 1: Hierarchical Community Level Di usion.

1 INTRODUCTION
In the era of Web 2.0, online social networks (OSN), such as Twi er, Facebook and Weibo, are becoming increasingly popular platforms for social interactions and communication. Social network users form a large-scale complex network by establishing who-followswho relationships/friendships, and generate textual contents by tweeting/posting. ey also share semantic information through their social network connections, e.g. retweeting/reposting, which accounts for the majority of information di usion in social networks. In this paper, we focus on modeling such information di usion processes to gain be er insight on the information spreading mechanisms along with users' topical and social preferences, which are useful in many IR tasks such as personalized social search.
Related studies can be roughly divided into two main categories: one is information di usion modeling [3, 17, 19, 23, 36, 37], the other is semantic analysis combining textual content with network structures [4, 7­9, 16, 22, 24]. Although much progress has been made, the existing work still su ers from several limitations:
· Most work in literature models information di usion at the individual level. However, the high volatility of user behaviors renders it di cult to accurately uncover di usion pa erns for individual level models [19]. Moreover, those models, especially in uence-based ones e.g. [23, 34, 37], become computationally prohibitive to inference when dealing with large scale networks usually with more than millions of nodes and billions of links.

753

Session 7A: Social

SIGIR'17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

structure
social hierarchy (directionality)
social tie strength

Existing work

This paper

topic interest

topic popularity

semantics

(expertise, authoritativenss, etc.)

Is this post

Does this post

interesting to come from someone popular in

users?

its topic?

Figure 2: Two-dimension interleaving space for information di usion phenomena. Most existing work only tackles one dimension or one point in the space.

· Few models holistically depict the retweeting behaviors, which explicitly indicate information di usion from source users to target users (i.e. retweeters). For example, Hu et. al. [19] model the retweet network and posts separately, ignoring semantic information on retweet links as well as posts' retweeting source, which fails to capture the whole retweeting process and has weaker performance as showed in Section 3.2. [35, 37] have studied retweeting behaviors systematically; nonetheless, the discriminative methods they use make it only applicable to speci c tasks, such as the retweet prediction, but not to the others.
To overcome those limitations, we propose a uni ed information di usion approach, HCID (Hierarchical Community-level Information Di usion), to jointly model information di usion processes in two dimensions, network structure and information semantics (see Figure 2). e proposed approach models information di usion at the community level similarly to [19], yet our contribution extends the notion of communities to be er capture information di usion in those two dimensions respectively.1
First, the traditional concept of communities is typically only concerned with social tie strengths to capture locally dense subgraph structures. However, social science studies reveal that social communication exhibits hierarchy, in the sense that people from higher level communities barely receive information from lower level communities. For instance, in uential users (celebrities, amusing story publishers etc.) are more popular and hence have more followers, but they seldom follow "ordinary people" and cautiously retweet their posts due to high social status and concerns about public opinions in twi er-like microblogs. We plot the numbers of users' followers (i.e., in-degrees, which re ect users' social status to a certain extent) in unilateral and reciprocal follow relationships in Weibo2 in Figure 3. We can nd that one tends to follow other users with higher out-degrees (which is also studied as disassortative degree mixing [29]), while reciprocal relationships are more likely to establish between users with similar numbers of followers (which is called assortativeness [25] in network science).
1 e father of mass communications, Wilbur Schramm, argues that it is no accident that "community" and "communication" have the same word roots [28]. 2Sina Weibo is a popular microblogging service in China.

Figure 3: Follow relationship hierarchy in Weibo. e horizontal axis and the vertical axis denote the numbers of followers for users on the outward and inward sides of follow relationships, respectively.
us, we introduce the notion of community hierarchy, which de nes the direction of information ows at the community level and enables our model to capture information di usion pa erns of higher complexity. Further, empirical study veri es this intuition and shows substantial model performance improvement on various evaluation metrics.
Second, social communities are associated with similar topical preferences in our model. Most approaches, concerning users' topic interests e.g. [16, 19, 22], assume that every user has a single topic distribution, serving as both his/her topic interests and popularity. However, a user's interest in a topic (as a receiver) is not necessarily the same as others' interests towards him/her (as a sender) in that topic. For example, a famous politician in Twi er might take strong interests in American football, thereby retweeting a large amount of posts3 about NFL games and only a few pieces of politics related posts. Most people usually are not interested in the NFL news he shares but those political opinions that account for only a small proportion of his total posts. erefore, we propose the notion of communities' topic popularity to capture this kind of source-aware information di usion phenomenon upon di erent topics.
Figure 1 summaries our proposed model. e input is a relationship network along with retweeting logs, each of which contains the textual content, the source user and the target user (retweeter) of a retweet. Our goal is to understand the mechanism of information di usion across communities by extracting hierarchical communities with their interests and popularity in di erent topics.
To conclude, the major contributions of this paper are:
· Our model extends the concept of social communities to be er model information di usion processes. We take community hierarchy into consideration in addition to social tie strengths. Further, we incorporate communities' topic popularity along with their topic interests into our model to capture the topic-aware and source-aware information di usion phenomenon.
· We design a constrained Gibbs sampling algorithm to estimate model parameters, which is computationally linear w.r.t. the input network and retweeting logs. ose interpretable parameters can be exploited in several application tasks.
3We use the words "post" and "tweet" interchangeably in this paper.

754

Session 7A: Social

SIGIR'17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Table 1: Notations used in this paper.

Symbols U, V, C, K
Eu , Du
u
c
c
k

cc
Ie Id se , se
cd , cd zd
wdl 0, 1 ,, ,, 

Descriptions number of users, vocabularies, communities, and topics number of retweet logs of user u as a retweeter, and links from user u community membership, multinomial distribution over communities of user u topic interests, multinomial distribution over topics of community c topic popularity, multinomial distribution over topics of community c multinomial distribution over words speci c to topic k multinomial distribution over topics of the total posts topic-irrelevant social in uence to community c from community c indicator of the existence of link e indicator of the existence of retweet d communities associated with follower and followee of link e communities associated with target user and source user of retweet d topic of retweet d the l-th word of retweet d Beta priors on  Dirichlet priors on u , c , c , k , 

· rough experiments on real datasets, we demonstrate substantial predictive performance improvement achieved by our model compared with the existing work, and interesting insights concerning community hierarchy in microblog social networks.
e rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces our proposed model and its major application in information di usion prediction, while Section 3 reports our experimental analysis. We review literature in Section 4 and conclude our work in Section 5.
2 MODEL
2.1 Formulation
We use G = (U, E) to denote the relationship network, where U is the set of all users, E is the set of directed social links (e.g. whofollows-who relationships and retweet networks). D is used to represent the set of retweet logs. Each retweet log d = (u, , wd)  D denotes a post retweeted by the target user u from the source user with textual content wd.
De nition 2.1. Community. A social network consists of C communities denoted as c  [1, 2, ..., C], where community members intensively interact with each other and share similar social preferences. Each user u  U may take part in multiple communities in di erent contexts, according to a multinomial distribution u ,



u

s0e

se

cd

c0d

Ie

Id

zd

Eu

cc0 C2
0, 1

c

c0 0

C



0

wdl Du U
k
K

Figure 4: e Graphical Model Representation.
where each component uc denotes user u's tendency toward the membership of community c.
De nition 2.2. Topic. A topic k  [1, 2, ..., K] is represented by a multinomial distribution over the vocabulary, denoted as k . Every post d  D is associated with a topic zd according to its textual content wd.
De nition 2.3. Topic Interest and Topic Popularity. Every community c has two components: a multinomial distribution c , where ck represents the topic interest of community c toward topic k; and a multinomial distribution c , where ck represents the topic popularity of community c with regard to topic k.
De nition 2.4. Community-level In uence Strength. ere is a Bernoulli distribution cc between any two communities c and c , representing their topic-irrelevant in uence strength.
De nition 2.5. Community Hierarchy. We divide communities into L hierarchical levels, denoted as l  [1, 2, ..., L], where level 1 representing the lowest level and level L the highest. Each community c is pre-assigned to a speci c hierarchical level lc .
All the notations used in this paper are listed in Table 1.
2.2 Model Description
Users take part in di erent communities in di erent se ings. erefore, we employ the mixed-membership approach [1]: each user u is associated with a multinomial membership distribution vector u , where each component uc = P (c |u) denotes the probability that user u acts as a member of community c.
We also incorporate probabilistic semantic analysis into our model. Each retweet log d = (u, , wd)  D contains a bag of words wd. We assign a topic zd to each d. e bag of words wd is then drawn from the corresponding word distribution zd . Unlike [19, 38], the topics are drawn from a consistent topic distribution  instead of a personalized topic distribution (e.g., c ), because we focus on retweets instead of original posts in our model and, of

755

Session 7A: Social

SIGIR'17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

course, users who retweet those posts cannot control their textual contents, which are usually determined by combined e ect of the entire social network.
In our model, every time a user u establishes a social link e to user , user u chooses to act as a member of a speci c community se , and user is regarded as a member of speci c community se .
e probability of the existence of link e is determined by the community-level in uence strength se se .
Likewise, each retweet log d is assigned to two communities cd and cd , one for the target user (retweeter) u and one for the source user , denoting their community membership when taking this retweeting action. In other words, inter-community interactions serve as information di usion channels in our model. In order to capture the topic-aware and source-aware retweeting mechanism, we assume that the retweeting decision depends on three factors: the topic-irrelevant in uence strength cd cd , the topic interest of the target community cd , and the topic popularity of the source community cd . e rst factor serves as the potential likelihood for retweet actions to occur, while the la er two determine whether the potential likelihood is activated due to retweeters' interests in both the topic and the information source.
Here, we utilize both social links and retweet interactions to model information di usion, under the observation that retweet interactions re ect information di usion more accurately, but are sparser than social links. Informally, social links serve as "priors" for retweet interactions and become trivial when retweet logs are su cient.
Due to the sparsity of social networks, we only model positive links and existing retweet logs; se , se and cd , cd exist if and only if e  E and d  D, respectively. As in [18, 19], we use a Beta(0, 1) prior on each cc and negative samples are implicitly modeled in the beta-binomial hyper-parameters 0 =  · ln(Nne /C2) and 1 = 0.1, where Nne = U (U - 1)(1 + D/E) - E - D and  is a tunable weight. us, linear model complexity w.r.t the number of links and retweet logs can be achieved.
Finally, we address the notion of community hierarchy. Every community c is pre-assigned to a hierarchical level lc . A social link e can only be established when lse  lse , and a retweet action d can only occur when lcd  lcd . at is, we assume information
ows downwards or horizontally, not upwards, because of social status. Yet, such information di usion processes of high complexity as loops can still be captured thanks to multiple di usion channels established between multiple community memberships. For example, a user may receive a piece of information within a lower level community (possibly from a higher one) and di use this piece of information as a member of a higher level community she also belongs to. For the same reason, the possibility that "high level" users may retweet some high-quality posts from "low level" ones is not ruled out.
Note that, in our model, we use with the same conjugate Beta priors on  to model in uence strengths across both inter- and intra- level communities for tractability and simplicity. e posterior in uence strengths across two anti-hierarchy communities are minimized in the model inference stage, as explained later in Section 2.3. Also, since community detection is an unsupervised procedure in our model, we can arbitrarily assign hierarchical levels

to communities according to a pre-set partition. For instance, if we want to associate 20% of communities with the highest level, we can simply assign level L to the rst 20% communities (i.e. let lc = 1, c  [1, ..., C/5 ]), thanks to symmetry.
Figure 4 shows the graphical representation of our proposed model. e generative process of all social links and retweet logs is summarized in Algorithm 14.
Algorithm 1 Generative process.
(1) For each community c = 1, 2, ..., C, (a) Draw topic interest distribution, c  Dir ( ). (b) Draw popularity distribution, c  Dir ( ). (c) For each community c = 1, 2, ..., C, (i) Draw the community-level in uence strength, cc  Beta(0, 1).
(2) For each topic k = 1, 2, ..., K, (a) Draw the multinomial distribution over vocabularies, k  Dir ( ).
(3) For each user u = 1, 2, ..., U , (a) Draw the community membership distribution, u  Dir (). (b) For each link e = (u, )  Eu , (i) Draw user u's community, se  Cat (u ). (ii) Draw user 's community, se  Cat (v ). (iii) Draw the existence indicator, Ie  Ber (se,se ). (c) For each retweet log d = (u, , wd)  Du , (i) Draw user u's community, cd  Cat (u ). (ii) Draw user 's community, cd  Cat (v ). (iii) Draw topic indicator, zd  Cat () (iv) Draw textual content, wd  Mul (zd ). (v) Draw the existence indicator, Id  Ber (cl ,cl cd zd cd zd ).

2.3 Inference and Parameter Estimation
In this section, we show how to estimate the latent space parameters (i.e.  ,  ,  , , , ) from observed data (i.e. G (U, E), D). Like that for many Bayesian models, exact inference for our proposed model is di cult due to the intractable partition functions. We therefore exploit the collapsed Gibbs sampling method (a widely used Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithm): rst, iteratively sample latent variables (i.e. z, c, c , s, s ) such that whose empirical distribution converges to the posterior; then, use those samples to estimate the model parameters of interest. e Gibbs sampling process at each iteration is described as follows.
· Sample community indicators se , se for each link e = (u, )  E according to

P (se = c, se = c |s-e, s-e, ·)



 

nu(c ) + nu(·) +C 

·

n(c ) + n(·) +C 

·

nc,c +1 nc,c +0+1

lc  lc

(1)

 0

lc > lc



4Here, Cat and Mul stand for Categorical distribution and Multinomial distribution, respectively.

756

Session 7A: Social

SIGIR'17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

· Sample community indicators cd , cd and the latent topic zd for each retweet d = (u, , w )  D according to

P (cd = c, cd = c |c-d, c-d, z-d, zd = k, ·)



 



nu(c ) +  nu(·) + C

·

n(c ) +  n(·) + C

·

nc(k ) +  nc(·) + K

·

nc(k nc( ·)

) + + K

· nc,c + 1 nc,c + 0 + 1

0



lc  lc lc > lc

(2)

P (zd = k |c-d, c-d, z-d, w, cd = c, cd = c , ·)



nc(k ) +  nc(·) + K

·

nc(k ) +  nc(·) + K

n(k ) +  · n(·) + K

(3)

·

V =1

nd( ) q=0

-1

(nk(

)

+q

+)

nd(·) -1 q=0

(nk( ·)

+q

+V

)

In the equations above, nu(c) denotes the number of times when user u acts as a member of community c in all links and retweets, nc(k ) denotes the number of posts of topic k retweeted by community c, nc(k ) is the number of posts of topic k retweeted from community c', nc,c is the number of links from community c to community c and posts retweeted by community c from community c , nk( ) represents the number of times word is assigned to topic k and n(k ) represents the number of posts assigned to topic k. nd( ) is precalculated counts denoting the number of times word occurs in
retweet d. We de ne z-d as all the topic indicators for posts except zd ; and the same with s-e, s-e, c-d, and c-d. All the counts are calculated with link e excluded in Eq. (1) and with post d excluded
in Eqs. (2-3).
A er an appropriate number of iterations until convergence, the
estimates for the latent space parameters can be obtained with the
following formulas:

·

Community membership  : uc

=

nu(c ) + nu(·) +C 

.

·

Topic interests  : ck

=

nc(k ) + nc(·) +K 

.

·

Topic popularity 

: c

k

=

nc(k ) + nc(·) +K 

.

·

In

uence strength : cc

=

nc,c +1 nc,c +0+1

.

·

Topic distribution : k

=

n (k ) + n(·) +K 

.

· Word distribution : k

=

nk( ) + nk(·) +V 

.

Note again that, we rst assign topic level indicators lc to each

community c according to pre-given ratios for di erent hierarchical

levels, and then implement the hierarchical community discovery

in the inference stage under the assumption that no anti-hierarchy

links and retweet actions would be observed. In other words, the

posterior probability of community indicators c and c is zero if

they violate the hierarchical rules with lc > lc , as we can see in Eqs.

(1-2) so that cc is minimized. e mathematical derivation and

convergence study of our constrained Gibbs sampler are reported in the Appendix.
Model Application. e obtained model parameters can be used in several application problems. Speci cally,  represents the hierarchical community structure discovered by HCID, which can be applied to collaborative recommendation tasks. Also,  can be exploited in topic extraction, while  along with communities' topic interest  and topic popularity  provides input parameters for in uence propagation models (e.g., Topic-aware Independent Cascade model [3]) to conduct topic-aware top-K in uencer retrieval at the community level. At last, the major application of our model is information di usion prediction, which will be covered in Section 2.4.

2.4 Prediction Method
2.4.1 Retweet Prediction. Retweet prediction is a common task of di usion analysis, whose aim is to predict whether a post d with textual content wd from user will be retweeted by another user u in microblog se ings. In other words, we are asked to estimate the conditional probability that user u will retweet a post given its content wd as well as source user , namely P (u |wd, )5.
In our approach, we regard this probability as a mixture over the topic-aware user-to-user in uence probabilities P (u |k, ) for all the topics k  [1, 2, ..., K],

P (u |wd, ) = P (k |wd, )P (u |k, ),

(4)

k

with mixture weights inferred through post d's content and its source user 's topic interest,

P (k |wd, )  P (k | )P (wd |k, ) = kwdl ·  cck . (5)

l

c

e user-to-user in uence can be converted into communitylevel di usion probabilities via community memberships,

P (u |k, ) = uc ·  c · P (c |k, c ),

(6)

c,c

while the la er can be decomposed to the product of topic-irrelevant in uence strengths , target communities' topic interest  and source communities' topic popularity  as discussed in Section 2.2

P (c |k, c ) = cc · ck · c k .

(7)

As in [19], we also nd that top few communities are su cient to represent users' behavioral preferences. On average, the top three community memberships of a user u add up to 85.2%, and the top ten 95.1%. is enables us to save a lot of computational costs by only considering users' top communities c and c in Eqs. (5-6), while top communities of each user can be obtained easily in the o ine pre-processing stage.
Compared to similar work, our prediction method not only considers users' topic interests, but also takes source users' topic popularity into account, which well captures users' topic expertise, topic-aware authoritativeness and other likewise phenomena. Additionally, in uence strengths (i.e., ) not only indicates social tie strengths, but also re ect social hierarchy in information di usion.

5Here, we slightly abuse the probability notation.

757

Session 7A: Social

SIGIR'17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

2.4.2 Cascade Prediction. In the retweet prediction, we focus on
direct user-to-user retweet behaviors, which serve as local "hops"
in the whole information di usion process. In other words, the
content wd of a post retweeted by user utar et from user usource may not be originated by usource ; it can also be a post retweeted from usource but originated from uroot . In the la er case, we say that utar et , usource and other users who have retweeted the same content are contaminated users in the information cascade
of content wd published by uroot . As we can see, the information cascading is global information di usion phenomenon. In this task,
our goal is to predict whether a user u will be contaminated in a
given information cascade q = (uroot , wd). We rst study the cascading problem at the community level. For
each topic k, we construct a graph of communities G (k ) = (C, A(k ) ), where Ak is an adjacency matrix with each component ac(k,c) = P (c |k, c ), topic-aware community-level di usion probability given
in Eq. (7). en, we de ne the probability that community c will be
contaminated by a cascade originated from c as

Pc (c |k, c

)

=

max
(c1=c,c2, ...,cm =c

)  C i [1,2, ...,m-1] ac(ki,)ci+1 ,

(8)

that is, the largest in uence community c can have on community c through any possible path. is can be implemented easily with the Floyd-Warshall algorithm [10] by taking negative logarithm of edge weights and nding shortest paths for each pair of communities. Note that, it is both theoretically unreasonable and computationally prohibitive for traditional user-level models to utilize this approach due to the huge di erences among users' in-degrees and the large number of users.
At last, we use the same method as in the retweet prediction to obtain the probability Pc (u |wd, ) of user u being contaminated by substituting P (c |k, c ) in Eq. (6) with Pc (c |k, c ).

2.5 Complexity Analysis
Since only positive links and retweet logs are modeled in HCID, the time complexity of the Gibbs sampling inference is linear w.r.t the size of input data and times of iterations T , i.e., O (T (|E | + |D|)) given parameters C and K xed. Further, in each iteration, the sampling time for community indicators associated with each link and each retweet is O (C2), while the sampling for topics is O (|wd | · K ), where |wd| is the number of words in retweet d usually with an upper limit of hundreds of words in microblogs.
e complexity of information di usion prediction consists of two parts. e o ine pre-processing stage for retweet prediction is O (U C) for extracting top-k communities for each user, while the cost for cascade prediction is O (C (U + C2)) for an additional run of the Floyd-Warshall algorithm. A er that, the online prediction for each retweet action takes only O (|w | · K ) in both of the two tasks.

3 EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we evaluate our proposed model using a real Weibo dataset. e experimental results show that our proposed model achieves substantial predictive performance improvement. We also conduct an analysis to uncover why it outperforms other baseline methods.

In the following experiments, we only study two-layered community hierarchy for a simple and clear demonstration, although community hierarchy with multiple levels can be implemented with no extra cost. We use h to denote the ratios of higher level communities. Further empirical study on community hierarchy is reported at the end of this section.
3.1 Experimental Setup
3.1.1 Dataset. Weibo. We use a real-world dataset of Sina Weibo from [37], containing both a relationship network G = (U, E) and retweet logs D = {(u, , wd )}.
In the data preprocessing step, stop words and the words occurred only once in the corpus are excluded; inactive users associated with less than 20 links and retweet logs in total are removed. All the retweet logs were made between June 1, 2012 and August 31, 2012. In the nal dataset we obtain, there are about 68K users, 8.1M links and 2.7M retweet logs containing 110M words in total.
e retweet logs D are split into training Dtr ainin (80%) and test Dtest (20%). Although only true positive samples are modeled in our approach, we need negative samples to evaluate predictive performance of our model. We therefore construct a half-sized negative test set Dtest randomly selected from D = {(une , , wd) D}, where une is a follower of who never retweeted a post with content wd from .
Moreover, to test model performance in the cascade prediction task, we generate a cascade set Qtest = {(uroot , w, Uc , Uc )}, where Uc is the set of contaminated users who retweeted the original post from uroot with content w while Uc is the set of randomly sampled uncontaminated users. It contains about 2K original posts' cascading records which never appear in Dtr ainin , with average 19.6 contaminated users within each cascade.
DBLP. We further validate our model on an academic social network from DBLP[32]. e dataset is generated in a similar manner to the Weibo dataset. Co-authorships and citations are regarded respectively as "friendships" and "retweets", where "tweets" are titles along with abstracts of the cited research papers. In summary, there are about 21K users, 2.3M links, and 5.9M "tweets" containing 412M words in total.
3.1.2 Baselines. We conduct comparison study with the following baseline models. Model (1-2) are two state-of-art information di usion modeling methods used to demonstrate performance improvement achieved by our approach. Model (3-4) are variants of our proposed model used to illustrate the contribution of two notions proposed in this paper, i.e., community hierarchy and topic popularity.
(1) COLD. Proposed in [19], COLD (COmmunity Level Di usion) is the state-of-art generative model for community level information di usion. In COLD, each user is also represented by a community membership distribution, and each community has a topic distribution that generates all the posts published by itself. An interaction network derived from retweeting logs without semantic information is modeled by pairwise Bernoulli distributions.
(2) CDK. Proposed in [6], CDK (Content Di usion Kernel) is a network embedding method to represent users in a latent vector space in such a way that information di usion can

758

Session 7A: Social

SIGIR'17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Table 2: AUC values of retweet prediction on Weibo. C and K are the number of communities and topics, respectively. Results of our proposed model are given for several values of h, the ratio of the higher level communities. Results of the baseline method No-Popularity are given for the best choice of h.

Method

K C=50 C=100 C=150

COLD

40 0.662 0.688 0.679 60 0.698 0.663 0.669

No-Popularity

40 0.750 60 0.746

0.788 0.770

0.754 0.776

No-Hierarchy

40 0.812 60 0.800

0.827 0.817

0.820 0.831

HCID (h = 10%)

40 60

0.824 0.813

0.830 0.828

0.821 0.821

HCID (h = 25%)

40 60

0.833 0.828

0.842 0.834

0.846 0.841

HCID (h = 50%)

40 60

0.829 0.827

0.842 0.840

0.844 0.843

be regarded as a heat di usion process in that space. Information di usion between two users is thereby predicted by their Euclidean distance. (3) No-Popularity. In this variant, we only use one topic distribution to represent each community's topical preference, thus not capable of di erentiating communities' topic popularity from their topic interests. (4) No-Hierarchy. In this variant, community hierarchy is not considered, and therefore links and retweet interactions can be established by any two communities.
3.2 Information Di usion Prediction
We evaluate HCID's predictive performance of information diffusion in two sub-tasks, the retweet prediction and the cascade prediction. e two tasks respectively represent one "hop" and the whole process of information di usion.
3.2.1 Retweet Prediction Performance. e problem formulation of retweet prediction is given in Section 2.4. Since no pre-de ned threshold for the existence of a given post in both our proposed model and baseline models, we regard the di usion prediction as an information retrieval problem aiming to rank Dtest before Dtest in terms of the di usion probability calculated in Eq. (4), and use Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC) and Precision-Recall Curves as metrics. Note that CDK is not applicable to this task so that we only compare the other baseline methods.
Table 2 lists the results of all comparison approaches on the Weibo dataset. We can see that all three baseline methods perform worse than our proposed model HCID. Figure 5 visualizes their performances using Precision-Recall curves. We observe that more topics do not necessarily bring be er performances. It is possibly because users usually do not di erentiate topics very meticulously when making retweet decisions and the overestimated number of topics may cause over ing problems.

Figure 5: Retweet Prediction Performance on Weibo. h is set to the optimal options for HCID.

AUC AUC

0.85

Without Content With Content

0.8

0.75

0.7

0.65 COLD

No-Popularity No-Hierarchy

HCID

C=50 C=100 C=150 0.85 0.84 0.83 0.82 0.81

No-Hierarchy h=10%

h=25%

h=50%

Figure 6: Performance Improvement Analysis on Weibo. If not speci ed, C, K and h are set to the optimal parameter options, i.e., 100, 40, and 25%, respectively.

We conduct further analysis on the performance improvement by HCID. As discussed in Section 2.2, a retweet decision depends on two parts, the topic-irrelevant in uence strength from the source user to the target and the content of the post. Figure 6(le ) shows the predictive performance results without and with the la er part, respectively. We can see that the semantic content helps for NoHierarchy and HCID to obtain be er performance, while the opposite for COLD and No-Popularity. is is not surprising for COLD and No-Popularity which use the same distributions to model users' topic preferences both as information spreaders and as information receivers. In fact, there is only an averaged Jaccard similarity of 0.486 between the two sets of top three topics that a community is most interested in and has the most popularity in, respectively.
is number is even smaller for lower level communities, which is only 0.342, possibly because lower level communities generally have diverse interests and unpredictable popularity in those topics. Besides, without taking advantage of posts' retweeting source makes COLD exhibit even worse performance. Furthermore, we can nd that HCID achieves be er performance than No-Hierarchy mainly because the introduction of community hierarchy improves the community structure extraction, hence the estimation of topicirrelevant in uence strengths.
Figure 6(right) shows the impact of di erent ratios of higher communities h on the information di usion prediction. For small h (e.g., h = 10%), it is su cient to use 100 communities to group users who connect to each others closely and share similar behavior preferences. On the other hand, as h increases, users can be e ciently

759

Session 7A: Social

SIGIR'17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

COLD

CDK

HCID HCID (Cold-Start)

0.8

0.7

0.6

COLD CDK HCID 0.8 0.75 0.7 0.65 0.6

AUC AUC

C=50

C=100

C=150

C=50

C=75

C=100

Figure 7: Cascade Prediction Performance on the Weibo(le ) and DBLP(right) dataset. C denotes the latent space dimensions for CDK, and h is set to the optimal options for HCID.

Figure 8: Comparison of the ratios of "Big V"s in active users in di erent sets of communities in Weibo.
divided into more ner-grained communities with more precise retweet pa erns, thus achieving be er predictive performance.
erefore, we can conclude that the substantial performance improvement by our proposed model HCID is achieved by incorporating the notions of topic popularity and community hierarchy, along with the holistic retweet modeling approach taking posts' retweeting source into account.
3.2.2 Cascade Prediction Performance. In addition to the capability of predicting a single "hop" (i.e., a retweet interaction between two users) in the information di usion process, our model HCID is able to predict the whole message cascade. In order to evaluate the prediction results, we treat the prediction for each cascade q  Qtest as a retrieval task whose goal is to rank contaminated users Uc before the uncontaminated Uc in that cascade. We then average the AUC values for all cascades.
It is worthwhile to mention that there are some users (about 5%) in Weibo test set Qtest who never posted any message recorded in the retweet logs Dtr ainin . Neither COLD nor CDK can predict retweet actions regarding those users because no community membership distribution or embedding vector exists for them. Nonetheless, our model HCID can take advantage of users' friendship network, and cold-start users associated with no retweet logs can still be given a high-quality community membership distribution collaboratively. In our experiment, we rst remove cold-start users for a fair comparison. A er that, we evaluate our model on the complete test. As shown in Figure 7, HCID outperforms other baseline methods consistently on both Weibo and DBLP datasets.

Table 3: Comparison of the statistics of higher and lower level communities with h = 25% and C = 100.

Statistics ratio of participation (tol.) #user per community (avg.)
pagerank (avg.) in-degree centrality (avg.) betweenness centrality (avg.)

Higher level 23.72% 6372.4 1.288 0.0170 0.00020

Lower level 76.28% 6980.1 0.707 0.0078 0.00009

3.3 Community Hierarchy
Experiments above show that introducing the notion of community hierarchy can bring substantial improvement with almost no additional cost. In this section, we will give an empirical comparison of higher and lower communities for more insights.
Table 3 demonstrates some statistics of higher and lower communities in Weibo. Although social users seem to participate equally in both of the higher and lower level communities, various metrics indicate users who are actively involved in higher level communities have higher centrality than the others. As mentioned in Section 1, those higher level communities are more likely to be venues for in uential users who seldom follow "ordinary people" in the lower level and cautiously retweet their posts due to high social status and concerns about public opinions. Figure 8 justi es this interpretation. e ratio of "Big V"s6 among active users in higher level communities is signi cantly larger than that in lower level communities.
Similar results can be also obtained in DBLP. It is worth mentioning that higher level community members (h is set to 25%) are up to 7 times more likely to serve as program commi ee (PC) members of top-tier conferences, which shows that the community hierarchy can reveal seniority and general authoritativeness (compared to topical authoritativeness) of researchers in citation networks. e conference data is obtained from [23], which covers six mainstream research areas in computer science.
4 RELATED WORK
Our work is closely related to information di usion and probabilistic semantic analysis, while existing work on community detection inspires our idea as well.
Information Di usion. Information di usion is a vast research domain, a racting extensive research interests [15], including in uence maximization (e.g. [20, 21]) and in uential node detection (e.g. [23, 27]) with two types of information propagation models, Independent Cascade Model [11] and Linear reshold Model [14]. Behind those approaches, there is a fundamental problem to model and estimate social in uence between two nodes/users (e.g. [12, 13, 33]), which is also more relevant to our work.
Gomez-Rodriguez et. al. proposes NETINF [12] to infer in uence strengths between news media sites and blogs from citation cascades. Tang et. al. [31] leverages a factor graph model to investigate the relationship between conformity and in uence with retweet cascades and users' a ributes. Topical A nity Propagation (TAP) [30] models topic-level social in uence, but it regards
6In Weibo, veri ed accounts with more than 0.5M followers are called "Big V", a well-recognized concept to represent in uential users.

760

Session 7A: Social

SIGIR'17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

topic extraction only as a pre-processing stage without considering topics' interdependence with network structures. Barbieri et. al. [3] also incorporates topics into di usion models and proposes estimation methods for topic-aware in uence strengths. However, the topics are totally based on network structure without taking advantage of semantic information. Finally, our work is most related to the Community Level Di usion (COLD) model, which is a novel approach to model information di usion at the community level proposed by Hu et. al. [19].
Probabilistic Semantic Analysis. Another line of existing research is the probabilistic semantic analysis. Blei et. al. rst proposes a generative topic model LDA [5]. A er that, Cha et. al. [7] apply topic models to social network analysis. Zhao et. al. [39] propose a content-based user in microblog se ings.
Furthermore, various topic models are proposed combining semantic content with linking structures both in document citation networks (e.g. Topic-Link-LDA [22], RTM [8]) and in social networks (e.g. SRTM [16], FLDA [4]). In most of those models, textual contents and links are assumed to be generated by the same topic distribution (in some literature, it is also called mixed-membership of communities). However, this assumption is not well ed with social networks, especially microblogs, in two major reasons: rst, links are not necessarily relevant to users' topic interests and they also establish links due to social relationships or conformity; second, users' strong interests in a certain topic do not always indicate that they have signi cant popularity in that topic as well and such complexity cannot be captured by a single consistent interest distribution for each user.
Community Detection. Our model captures social relationships and users' preferences at the community level and can be applied to community detection as well. While extensive discriminative approaches are proposed [26], our work is more relevant to probabilistic generative community detection models. Airoldi et. al. proposes the Mixed Membership Stochastic Block (MMSB) model [1] where each user is associated with a membership distribution over communities as HCID. Bonchi et. al. proposes the Cascadebased Community Detection (CCN) model [2], which discovers overlapping communities by leveraging information cascading behaviors. Han et. al. introduces users' social roles into network structure modeling and community detection in the Community Role Model (CRM) [17], which inspires our idea of community hierarchy to some degree.
5 CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a Hierarchical Community-level Information Di usion (HCID) model. is model can not only help us be er understand information di usion pa erns by extracting communities which well re ect both the structural and the semantic dimensions of information di usion, but also have strong predictive capability. We evaluate our model on two real datasets from, Weibo and DBLP. Results show that our model outperforms other baseline approaches, thanks to two innovative notions community hierarchy and topic popularity that we propose in this paper.
ere are several ways to extend our work in the future. One of them is deeper investigation on more complex interaction mechanisms across multiple hierarchical community levels. We also plan

to incorporate more types of social contagions, such as clicking
"like", into our generative framework to be er understand infor-
mation di usion processes. Lastly, it might be an interesting and
challenging problem to study information di usion across dynamic
communities with changing hierarchical structures.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
e authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their
valuable comments and helpful suggestions. is work is supported
by 973 Program under Grant No. 2014CB340405, NSFC under Grant
No. 61532001 and No.61370054, and MOE-RCOE under Grant No.
2016ZD201.
REFERENCES
[1] Edoardo M Airoldi, David M Blei, Stephen E Fienberg, and Eric P Xing. 2008. Mixed membership stochastic blockmodels. Journal of Machine Learning Research 9, Sep (2008), 1981­2014.
[2] Nicola Barbieri, Francesco Bonchi, and Giuseppe Manco. 2013. Cascade-based community detection. In Proceedings of the sixth ACM international conference on Web search and data mining. ACM, 33­42.
[3] Nicola Barbieri, Francesco Bonchi, and Giuseppe Manco. 2013. Topic-aware social in uence propagation models. Knowledge and Information System 37, 3 (2013), 555­584.
[4] Bin Bi, Yuanyuan Tian, Yannis Sismanis, Andrey Balmin, and Junghoo Cho. 2014. Scalable Topic-speci c In uence Analysis on Microblogs. In Proceedings of the 7th ACM international conference on Web search and data mining. ACM, 513­522.
[5] David M Blei, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan. 2003. Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of machine Learning research 3, Jan (2003), 993­1022.
[6] Simon Bourigault, Cedric Lagnier, Sylvain Lamprier, Ludovic Denoyer, and Patrick Gallinari. 2014. Learning social network embeddings for predicting information di usion. In Proceedings of the 7th ACM international conference on Web search and data mining. ACM, 393­402.
[7] Youngchul Cha and Junghoo Cho. 2012. Social-network analysis using topic models. In Proceedings of the 35th international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval. ACM, 565­574.
[8] Jonathan Chang and David M Blei. 2009. Relational topic models for document networks. In AISTATS. 81­88.
[9] Elena Erosheva, Stephen Fienberg, and John La erty. 2004. Mixed-membership models of scienti c publications. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 101 (2004), 5220­5227.
[10] Robert W. Floyd. 1962. Algorithm 97: Shortest Path. Commun. ACM 5, 6 (June 1962), 345­. DOI:h p://dx.doi.org/10.1145/367766.368168
[11] Jacob Goldenberg, Barak Libai, and Eitan Muller. 2001. Talk of the Network: A Complex Systems Look at the Underlying Process of Word-of-Mouth. Marketing Le ers 12, 3 (2001), 211­223.
[12] Manuel Gomez Rodriguez, Jure Leskovec, and Andreas Krause. 2010. Inferring networks of di usion and in uence. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM, 1019­ 1028.
[13] Amit Goyal, Francesco Bonchi, and Laks VS Lakshmanan. 2010. Learning in uence probabilities in social networks. In Proceedings of the third ACM international conference on Web search and data mining. ACM, 241­250.
[14] Mark Granove er. 1978. reshold Models of Collective Behavior. Amer. J. Sociology 83, 6 (1978), 1420­1443.
[15] Adrien Guille, Hakim Hacid, Ce´cile Favre, and Djamel A Zighed. 2013. Information di usion in online social networks: A survey. SIGMOD Record 42, 2 (2013), 17­28.
[16] Weiyu Guo, Shu Wu, Liang Wang, and Tieniu Tan. 2015. Social-Relational Topic Model for Social Networks. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM International on Conference on Information and Knowledge Management. ACM, 1731­1734.
[17] Yu Han and Jie Tang. 2015. Probabilistic community and role model for social networks. In Proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. ACM, 407­416.
[18] Qirong Ho, Rong Yan, Rajat Raina, and Eric P. Xing. 2012. Understanding the Interaction between Interests, Conversations and Friendships in Facebook. CoRR abs/1211.0028 (2012).
[19] Zhiting Hu, Junjie Yao, Bin Cui, and Eric Xing. 2015. Community level di usion extraction. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data. ACM, 1555­1569.
[20] David Kempe, Jon Kleinberg, and E´ va Tardos. 2003. Maximizing the spread of in uence through a social network. In Proceedings of the ninth ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM, 137­146.

761

Session 7A: Social

SIGIR'17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

[21] Jure Leskovec, Andreas Krause, Carlos Guestrin, Christos Faloutsos, Jeanne VanBriesen, and Natalie Glance. 2007. Cost-e ective outbreak detection in networks. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM, 420­429.
[22] Yan Liu, Alexandru Niculescu-Mizil, and Wojciech Gryc. 2009. Topic-link LDA: joint models of topic and author community. In proceedings of the 26th annual international conference on machine learning. ACM, 665­672.
[23] Tiancheng Lou and Jie Tang. 2013. Mining structural hole spanners through information di usion in social networks. In Proceedings of the 22nd international conference on World Wide Web. ACM, 825­836.
[24] Ramesh Nallapati and William W Cohen. 2008. Link-PLSA-LDA: A New Unsupervised Model for Topics and In uence of Blogs. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Web and Social Media.
[25] Mark EJ Newman. 2002. Assortative mixing in networks. Physical review le ers 89, 20 (2002), 208701.
[26] Symeon Papadopoulos, Yiannis Kompatsiaris, Athena Vakali, and Ploutarchos Spyridonos. 2012. Community detection in social media. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 24, 3 (2012), 515­554.
[27] Mojtaba Rezvani, Weifa Liang, Wenzheng Xu, and Chengfei Liu. 2015. Identifying top-k structural hole spanners in large-scale social networks. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM International on Conference on Information and Knowledge Management. ACM, 263­272.
[28] Wilbur Schramm and Porter William. 1982. Men, women, messages, and media: Understanding human communication. New York: Harper & Row.
[29] Mohsen Shahriari, Sebastian Kro , and Ralf Klamma. 2015. Disassortative Degree Mixing and Information Di usion for Overlapping Community Detection in Social Networks (DMID). In Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on World Wide Web Companion. 1369­1374.
[30] Jie Tang, Jimeng Sun, Chi Wang, and Zi Yang. 2009. Social in uence analysis in large-scale networks. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM, 807­816.
[31] Jie Tang, Sen Wu, and Jimeng Sun. 2013. Con uence: Conformity in uence in large social networks. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM, 347­355.
[32] Jie Tang, Jing Zhang, Limin Yao, Juanzi Li, Li Zhang, and Zhong Su. 2008. Arnetminer: extraction and mining of academic social networks. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM, 990­998.
[33] Rongjing Xiang, Jennifer Neville, and Monica Rogati. 2010. Modeling relationship strength in online social networks. In Proceedings of the 19th international conference on World wide web. ACM, 981­990.
[34] Yang Yang, Jie Tang, Cane Wing-ki Leung, Yizhou Sun, Qicong Chen, Juanzi Lit, and Qiang Yang. 2015. RAIN: Social Role-aware Information Di usion. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Arti cial Intelligence. AAAI, 367­373.
[35] Zi Yang, Jingyi Guo, Keke Cai, Jie Tang, Juanzi Li, Li Zhang, and Zhong Su. 2010. Understanding retweeting behaviors in social networks. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM international conference on Information and knowledge management. ACM, 1633­1636.
[36] Nicholas Jing Yuan, Yuan Zhong, Fuzheng Zhang, Xing Xie, Chin Yew Lin, and Yong Rui. 2016. Who Will Reply to/Retweet is Tweet?: e Dynamics of Intimacy from Online Social Interactions. In Proceedings of the Ninth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. ACM, 3­12.
[37] Jing Zhang, Jie Tang, Juanzi Li, Yang Liu, and Chunxiao Xing. 2015. Who in uenced you? predicting retweet via social in uence locality. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data (TKDD) 9, 3 (2015), 25.
[38] Wayne Xin Zhao, Jing Jiang, Jianshu Weng, Jing He, Ee-Peng Lim, Hongfei Yan, and Xiaoming Li. 2011. Comparing twi er and traditional media using topic models. In European Conference on Information Retrieval. Springer, 338­349.
[39] Yukun Zhao, Shangsong Liang, Zhaochun Ren, Jun Ma, Emine Yilmaz, and Maarten de Rijke. 2016. Explainable user clustering in short text streams. In Proceedings of the 39th International ACM SIGIR conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. ACM, 155­164.
A SAMPLING HIERARCHICAL COMMUNITY
INDICATORS
In this paper, we design a constrained Gibbs sampling algorithm under the assumption that no anti-hierarchy links and retweets would be observed. We denote this assumption as A = e E Ae 
d D Ad , where Ae and Ad represent the event lse  lse and lcd  lcd respectively. Now we show the derivation of Eqs. (1-2).

First, using Bayes' rule, we can get the joint distribution of all latent variables under the assumption A

P (c, c , s, s , z|A, ·) (9)
 P (A|c, c , s, s , z, ·) · P (c, c , s, s , z|, ·).

From the graphical model representation in Figure 4, we then obtain

P (c, c , s, s , z|·) (10)
 P (c, c , s, s |) · P (z| ) · P (w |z,  ) · P (I, I |, c, c , s, s ).

e conditional of se and se can be calculated by dividing the joint distribution of all latent variables by the joint of all variables except

se and se ,

P (se = c, se = c |s-e, s-e, c, c , z, A, ·)

=

P (c, c , s, s , z|A, ·) P (c, c , s-e, s-e, z|A, ·)

P (A|c, c , s, s , z, ·)

P (c, c , s, s , z|·)

 P (A-e |c, c , s-e, s-e, z, ·) · P (c, c , s-e, s-e, z|·)

(11)



P (Ae |se

= c, se

=c

)

·

P (c, c , s, s |) P (c, c , s-e, s-e |)

· P (I, I |, c, c , s, s ) . P (I, I-e |, c, c , s-e, s-e )

e rst fraction of Eq. (11) is easy to obtain by the de nition of

Ae ,

P (Ae |se , se ) =

1 lse  lse 0 lse > lse .

(12)

Next, we show how to derive the second fraction

P (c, c , s, s |) P (c, c , s-e, s-e |)

=

P ( |)P (c, c , s, s | )d ,
P ( |)P (c, c , s-e, s-e | )d

(13)

where the integrals can be calculated in the following way,

P ( |)P (c, c , s, s | )d

=

u

 (C  ) c ()

c

u-c1 ·
u

unu(cc) d
c

(14)

=
u

 (C  ) ·
c ()

c (nu(c) + (nu(·) + C

 )

)

.

By plugging Eq. (14) into Eq. (13) and canceling out the same terms

with the trick (x + 1) = x (x ), we can obtain

P (c, c , s, s |) P (c, c , s-e, s-e |)

=

nuce, -e nu( ·,)-e

+ +

·

nce, -e

n

(

·) , -e

+ ,
+

(15)

while the third fraction in Eq. (11) can be obtained in a similar fashion,

P (I, I-e |, c, c

, s-e, s-e )

=

nc,c ,-e + 1 nc,c ,-e + 0 + 1

.

(16)

Plugging Eq. (12) and Eqs. (15-16) into Eq. (11), we can nally derive the sampling formula in Eq. (1), where the assumption A and subscript -e are omi ed for a clear demonstration. Similarly, Eq. (2) can be derived.

762

