Keynote Talk
Future of the Web and Search
Qi Lu
Microsoft Bellevue, WA, USA qilu@microsoft.com
Abstract
No one doubts that we have only scratched the surface of what is possible with the Web. The day is coming fast when the Web will become almost a virtual mind reader. Your intent, interests, and needs will be instantly perceived and the information you want will be promptly delivered -whether you ask for it directly or not -- based on a deep understanding of the meaning of words in your query, knowledge of your preferences and patterns, what others have done before you, your location, and more. In this talk, I will share some of my thoughts about where the Web is heading and how search will be transformed to align to this new Web, laying out some specifics behind Microsoft's vision to empower people with knowledge.
Categories & Subject Descriptors: H3.3 Information Search and Retrieval, H4
Information System Applications
General Terms: Algorithms Bio
As president of Microsoft's Online Services Division (OSD), Dr. Qi Lu leads the company's search and online advertising efforts. Dr. Lu oversees the OSD Research & Development team which has responsibility for the evolution of Microsoft's search, portal and advertising services; the Online Audience Business Group; and the Advertiser and Publisher Solutions Business Group. Dr. Lu reports to Microsoft chief executive officer Steve Ballmer.
Prior to joining Microsoft, Dr. Lu spent 10 years as a Yahoo! senior executive. His roles included serving as the executive vice president of engineering for the company's Search and Advertising Technology Group where he oversaw the development of Yahoo!'s Web search and monetization platforms and vice president of engineering responsible for the technology development of Yahoo!'s search, e-commerce and local listings of businesses and products.
Before joining Yahoo!, Dr. Lu worked as a research staff member at IBM's Almaden Research Center and Carnegie Mellon University and was a faculty member at Fudan University in China. He received his bachelor of science and master of science in computer science from Fudan University and his Ph.D. in computer science from Carnegie Mellon University. Dr. Lu holds 20 U.S. patents.
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR'11, July 24-28, 2011, Beijing, China. ACM 978-1-4503-0757-4/11/07.
1

