Time-based Relevance Models

Mostafa Keikha
Faculty of Informatics University of Lugano
Switzerland
mostafa.keikha@usi.ch

Shima Gerani
Faculty of Informatics University of Lugano
Switzerland
shima.gerani@usi.ch

Fabio Crestani
Faculty of Informatics University of Lugano
Switzerland
fabio.crestani@usi.ch

ABSTRACT
This paper addresses blog feed retrieval where the goal is to retrieve the most relevant blog feeds for a given user query. Since the retrieval unit is a blog, as a collection of posts, performing relevance feedback techniques and selecting the most appropriate documents for query expansion becomes challenging. By assuming time as an effective parameter on the blog posts content, we propose a time-based query expansion method. In this method, we select terms for expansion using most relevant days for the query, as opposed to most relevant documents. This provide us with more trustable terms for expansion. Our preliminary experiments on Blog08 collection shows that this method can outperform state of the art relevance feedback methods in blog retrieval.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search and Retrieval
General Terms
Algorithms
1. INTRODUCTION
Blog search users often wish to identify and subscribe to blogs that regularly write about a given topic. The goal of blog feed search, also called blog distillation, is to provide users with such blogs [6]. It is different from traditional adhoc search since the retrieval unit is a blog (a collection of the posts), not a single document.
One of the open challenges in blog retrieval is relevance feedback and employing the most appropriate documents for query expansion. It has been shown that traditional pseudo relevance feedback methods can not achieve any significant improvement in blog retrieval [2]. Using the top retrieved posts can not cover all the aspects of the query, and using the top retrieved feeds would add noise because not all the posts in them are relevant [4]. State of the art methods, use the top posts in the top retrieved feeds in order to have both coverage and relevance in the selected terms [4].
One of the main properties of blogs is their temporal behaviour. On one hand, content of blogs can change over time. On the other hand, topics can evolve over time and different aspects of the topic might be discussed in different
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR'11, July 24­28, 2011, Beijing, China. ACM 978-1-4503-0757-4/11/07.

time intervals. This effect of time on the blogs content provides us with a new generative model in blogosphere. In this new model, we assume that for a given topic, first we select a date and then for the given date and topic we generate a term. Based on this new model, we select new terms to expand the query with.

2. TIME-BASED RELEVANCE MODELS

2.1 Relevance Models

The goal of relevance model is to select the most appro-

priate terms from initially retrieved documents to expand

the original query [3]. Terms are selected based on their

relevance to the query:

m

X

Y

P (w|Q)  P (w|D)P (D) P (qi|D)

(1)

D

i

In order to improve the performance, relevance model can

be smoothed with the original query model [5]:

P (w|Q) = (1 - )P (w|Q) + P (w|Q)

(2)

 is the parameter and in our experiments is set to be 0.5 which has been shown to be effective in different models [5].

2.2 Relevance Feedback Methods in Blogs
When we want to use relevance models in blog retrieval, we should decide about documents to be used in the expansion. While one can use top retrieved posts or blogs as the source of expansion, they have been shown to be not effective in improving the performance of a blog retrieval system [2]. Different methods have been used before which can be summarized as follows :
· Top Feeds: Uses all the posts of the top retrieved feeds for the query expansion. This model has two parameters including the number of the selected feeds and the number of the terms in the expanded query [2, 4].

· Top Posts: Uses the top retrieved posts for the query expansion. The number of the selected posts and the number of the terms to use for expansion are the parameters of this model [2, 4].

· FFBS: Uses the top posts in the top retrieved feeds as the source for selecting new terms. The number of the selected posts from each feed is fixed among different feeds. This model has three parameters; the number of the selected feeds, the number of the selected posts in each feed and the number of the selected terms for the expansion [4].

1087

· WFBS: Works the same as FFBS. The only difference is that number of selected posts for each feed depends on the feed rank in the initial list, such that more relevant feeds contribute more in generating the new query. Like FFBS, WFBS has also three parameters that are the number of the selected feeds, the total number of the posts to be used in the expansion and the number of the selected terms [4].

Among the mentioned methods, the "Top Feeds" method has the possibility to expand the query with non-relevant terms. The reason is that all the posts in a top retrieved feed are not necessarily relevant to the topic. On the other hand, the "Top Posts" method might not have enough coverage on all the sub-topics of the query, because the top retrieved posts might be mainly relevant to some dominant aspect of the query. FFBS and WFBS methods were originally proposed in order to have more coverage than the "Top Posts" method while selecting more relevant terms than the "Top Feeds" method [4].

2.3 Time-based Relevance Models
We propose a time-based relevance model where we assume that the date has effect on the terms written for a specific topic. In other word, we assume that the generative model of the query first selects a date and then select a term based on the date and the query:

X

P (w|Q) = P (w|day, Q)P (day|Q)

(3)

day
where P (w|day, Q) shows the importance of the term in a given day for the query and P (day|Q) shows the importance of a day for the query. These probabilities are estimated as follows:

X

P (w|day, Q) =

P (w|p)P (p|day, Q)

(4)

pday

P (day|Q)

=

P
pday

score(p,

Q)

P
day

P
pday

score(p, Q)

(5)

where p shows a post and p  day means the post is published in the specified day. P (p|day, Q) is set to be uniform for all the posts in each day. score(p, Q) defines the similarity score of the post for the given query and in our experiments is calculated using language modeling technique with Dirichlet smoothing.
The assumption is that selecting the expansion terms based on time would provide us with a better coverage over subtopics than the Top Posts method. On the other hand, since we use the top retrieved posts in the expansion phase, we add less irrelevant terms than the Top Feeds method. This model has two parameters including the number of the posts considered in the expansion phase and the number of the terms selected for expansion.

3. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
To evaluate our methods we use the TREC Blog08 data collection that is a collection of about 1 million blogs crawled over a year [6]. We use only the permalinks component of the data which consist of approximately 28.4 million documents in the collection. We use the Terrier Information Retrieval system1 to index the collection.
1http://ir.dcs.gla.ac.uk/terrier/

Table 1: Evaluation results for the implemented models over TREC09 data set.

Model BloggerModel
TopBlogs TopPosts
FFBS WFBS TemporalRM

MAP 0.2745 0.2777 0.2848 0.2857 0.2882 0.2931 

P@10 0.3974 0.4128 0.4282 0.4256 0.4256 0.4308

Bpref 0.2867 0.2973 0.3064 0.3031 0.3072 0.3116 

We employ the Blogger Model method for the initial ranking of the blogs [1] . All the parameters of the models are tuned by 5-fold cross validation technique. These parameters, depending on the system, include number of the posts and blogs used in the expansion and number of the terms selected for expansion.
Table 1 summarizes retrieval performance of Blogger Model and the baseline query expansion methods along with timebased relevance model on the TREC 2009 data set. As we can see in this table, the temporal relevance model outperforms all the baseline techniques in all the evaluation measures. Statistical significant tests are performed using Paired T-test at 0.05 level of significance. It can be seen that Temporal Relevance model has statistically significant improvements over the Blogger model and the Top Blogs model which is shown by and  respectively.
The experimental results confirm our intuition that using the temporal information as a source for selecting terms can lead us to a better expanded query.

4. CONCLUSION
Relevance Feedback is known to be effective in information retrieval, however in the blog retrieval it is hard to select good terms for expansion. We showed that using temporal information for improving the coverage of the new query over all the subtopics can be useful and improve the performance of the retrieval system.
5. REFERENCES
[1] K. Balog, M. de Rijke, and W. Weerkamp. Bloggers as experts: feed distillation using expert retrieval models. In Proceedings of SIGIR 2008, pages 753­754, 2008.
[2] J. L. Elsas, J. Arguello, J. Callan, and J. G. Carbonell. Retrieval and feedback models for blog feed search. In Proceedings of SIGIR 2008, pages 347­354, 2008.
[3] V. Lavrenko and W. B. Croft. Relevance-based language models. In In Proceedings of SIGIR 2001, pages 120­127, 2001.
[4] Y. Lee, S.-H. Na, and J.-H. Lee. An improved feedback approach using relevant local posts for blog feed retrieval. In Proceedings of CIKM 2009, pages 1971­1974, 2009.
[5] Y. Lv and C. Zhai. Positional language models for information retrieval. In Proceedings SIGIR '09, pages 299­306, 2009.
[6] C. MacDonald, I. Ounis, and I. Soboroff. Overview of the TREC-2009 Blog Track. In Proceedings of TREC 2009, 2009.

1088

