Graph-Cut based Tag Enrichment

Xueming Qian
Xi'an Jiaotong University Xi'an 710049, P. R. China

Xian-Sheng Hua
Microsoft Research Asia Beijing 100080, P. R. China

qianxm@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

xshua@microsoft.com

ABSTRACT
In this paper, a graph cut based tag enrichment approach is proposed. We build a graph for each image with its initial tags. The graph is with two terminals. Nodes of the graph are full connected with each other. Min-cut/max-flow algorithm is utilized to find the relevant tags for the image. Experiments on Flickr dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed graph-cut based tag enrichment approach.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.1 [Information Storage and Retrieval Languages]: Content Analysis and Indexing.
General Terms
Algorithms, Performance, Experimentation
Keywords: Tag enrichment, graph cut, Flickr, tag ranking,
Min-cut/Max-flow.
1. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, social networks (e.g. Picasa, Flickr, YouTube) are very popular for people to share their photos. With the rapid advance in the technology of digital imaging, there is an explosive growth in the amount of available image data in social media sharing networks. Social media repositories allow users to upload their personal media data and provide several descriptive keywords for their metadata. The descriptive keywords are called tags [1]. Tag is one of the most important textual information on social media networks. They made the social networks are easy to management and better accessible to the users. Image tags have certain consistent with its visual content. Thus tag based image retrieval is very popular and practical in the searching engines such as Flickr. However, due to the noise, imprecise and incompleteness of user labeled tags, the performance of tag based application is inevitably influenced by the tag quality.
Extensive research has been dedicated to the tag enrichment for social images. Liu et al. [1] proposed to rank the original tags of the images using random walk model by taking both the textual and visual similarities of tags into account. The random walk model promotes the tag with many close neighbors and weakens the tags with fewer neighbors. Li et al propose a neighbor voting algorithm for tag relevance learning [2]. This approach is based on the fact that different users label visually similar images using the same tags. The relevance of a tag with respect to an image can be inferred from tags of visual similar images. In this paper, we view the tag enrichment as a combinational optimization problem. And graph-cut is utilized to find relevant tag list for the image.
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR'11, July 25­29, 2011, Beijing, China. ACM 978-1-4503-0757-4/11/07.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Example of graph cut based application in vision. (b) Example of the sub-structure of the tag graph.

2. GRAPH CUT BASED TAG ENRICH

For a given image I and its initial tags   {t1,, tn} , we
utilize graph-cut based approach to determine the relevant tag set

to the image.

A tag graph G=<V,E> consists of a set of nodes V and a set of edge E. Each node corresponds to a tag. And E is the set of edges

connecting each of two nodes. The tag graph contains two additional special nodes that called terminals [3]: the source s and

the sink t. There are two types of edges in the tag graph: n-links and t-links. N-links connect each of two tags (nodes) and t-links

connect tags (nodes) to the terminals. Graph based tag enrichment is exactly to find a cut on a graph that partitioning the tags (nodes)

into two disjoint two subsets S and T, such that the source s in S and the sink t in T.

Fig.1 (a) shows a graph cut based applications in vision [3]. Nodes (pixels) are connected with the nodes in its four-neighbors.

A cut departs the nodes into two disjoint sets. However, in the proposed graph based tag enrichment, each tag is full connected

with the other tags by n-link and with terminal by t-links. Fig.1 (b) shows a substructure of a tag graph. Thus, the edge connection

structure is complex than those utilized in vision based applications [3].Each tag is connected with the other tags. The

weights of n-links can be viewed as tag to tag similarity. The tag enrichment can be viewed as assigning each tag a label (s or t).

The label of a tag is assigned s if it is relevant to the image;

otherwise its label is assigned t. How many tags are relevant to

the image is a combinational optimization problem, which can be

formulated by graph.

The energy function of graph cut based tag enrichment is

determined as follows

E(L)  Esmooth (L)  Edata (L)

(1)

where L  {Lp | p  } is a labeling of the whole tags  . Esmooth

measures the cost of departing the tags into two sets S and T

 Esmooth (L) 

Vp,q (Lp , Lq )

(2)

{ p,q}, p  q

1111

Vp,q

(Lp

,

Lq

)



  1

exp(d ( p, q))  exp(d ( p, q))

if Lp  Lq otherwise

(3)

where d(p,q) is the distance of tag p and q. In this paper we utilize

Google distance is to measure the distance of two tags [1].

In Eq.(1), Edata(L) measures the cost of the assignments of the tags relevant/irrelevant to the image.

 Edata (L)  D (L )

(4)

 

The cost is expressed as follows

D

(

L

)



  1

S 

( ), S( ),

if L  s if L  t

(5)

where S( ) measure the score of a the tag  to the image and

initial tags list  . S( ) comes from the tag to tag similarity and

the tag to image similarity

S( )  WI ( , I )  (1   )WT ( ,), [0,1]

(6)

WT ( ,) is the similarity of the tag to the initial tags  .

WT ( ,)  expd  ,t 

(7)

t

And WI ( , I ) measures the similarity of tag to the image I.

   WI ( , I)



1 | 

|

x

exp



FI  Fx

2

2

(8)

where  denote the image set that contains tag  , the image

number in this set is |  | .  2 is set to be the median value of all

the pair wise Euclidean distances between images [1]. FI and Fx are the visual features of images I and x. Correspondingly, we

utilize Min-cut/Max-flow algorithm to find the relevant tags for

each image [3].

3. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this Section, we evaluate our approach on social images that are collected from Flickr. We select 25 queries, including alcedoatthis, apple, beach, bear, butterfly, cherry, deer, eagle, forest, highway, jeep, lavender, lotus, orange, peacock, rose, sailship, sea, sky, strawberry, sun, sunflower, tiger, tower, and zebra, then perform tag-based image search with "ranking by interestingness" option. The top 5000 returned images for each query are collected together with their associated information, including tags, uploading time, user identifier, etc. In this way, we obtain a social image collection consisting of 52,418 images.
For each image, we extract 470-dimensional features, including 225-dimensional block-wise color moment features generated from 5-by-5 fixed partition of the image, 170-dimensional hierarchical wavelet packet features [4], and 75-dimensional edge distribution histogram features.
We use NDCG as the performance evaluation measure [1]. 500 images are randomly selected from our Flickr set for labeling by five persons. For each image, each of its tags is labeled as one of the five levels: Most Relevant (score 5), Relevant (score 4), Partially Relevant (score 3), Weakly Relevant (score 2), and Irrelevant (score 1). After computing the NDCG measures of each image's tag list, we can average them to obtain an overall performance evaluation of the tag enrichment method.
The NDCG scores of initial tags (denoted INIT), tag enrichment results of random walk (denoted RANK [1]), and graph cut based approach (denoted Graph) under NDCG depths 1, 5, 10 and 20 (denoted @1, @5, @10 and @20) are shown in Fig.2 respectively. The improvement of our approach over RANK, and INIT are 3.1% and 11.3% respectively under @5.

Graph-cut based tag enrichment approach can adaptively determine the relevant tags according to the visual information and hints of initial tags. Table 1 shows the corresponding tag enrichment results of RANK and Graph based on the visual information and initial tags of the photos. From the above comparisons, we find that the graph cut based tag enrichment approach is satisfactory.
4. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is partly supported by foundations of national nature science foundation of China (NSFC) No.60903121 and Microsoft Research Asia FY11-RES-THEME-052.
5. REFERENCES
[1] D. Liu, X. Hua, L. Yang, M. Wang, and H. Zhang, "Tag ranking", in Proc. WWW, 2009.
[2] X. Li, C. Snoek, and M. Worring, "Learning Social Tag Relevance by Neighbor Voting", IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol.11, no.7, 2009, pp. 1310-1322.
[3] Y. Boykov, and V. Kolmogorov, "An Experimental Comparison of Min-Cut/Max-Flow Algorithms for Energy Minimization in Vision", IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell, vol.26, no.9, pp. 1124-1137, 2004.
[4] X. Qian, G. Liu, D. Guo, Z. Li, Z. Wang, and H. Wang, "Object Categorization using Hierarchical Wavelet Packet Texture Descriptors," in Proc. ISM 2009, pp.44-51.

Figure 2. The performances of different tagging approaches Initial tag of Flickr (INIT), tag enrichment results of random walk (RANK) and Graph-cut (Graph).

Table 1. Initial tags (INIT), and tag enrichment results of RANK and the proposed graph cut based approach (Graph)

Photo

INIT insect lavender bee pollen
beach child tennessee

RANK
pollen plant garden bee insect flower green yellow bokeh color nature flora purple beauty colorful
beach sand water sea ocean playa child sun

Graph
bee insect pollen nectar bumblebee honey lavender wing garden plant stamen shrub purple flower bokeh
beach child tennessee family water wish action life

1112

