Domain Expert Topic Familiarity and Search Behavior

Sarvnaz Karimi

Falk Scholer

Adam Clark

Sadegh Kharazmi

NICTA and Dept of CSSE RMIT University

Alfred Health

RMIT University and NICTA

The University of Melbourne Melbourne, Australia Melbourne, Australia Melbourne, Australia

skarimi@unimelb.edu.au

falk.scholer@rmit.edu.au a.clark@alfred.org.au sadegh.kharazmi@rmit.edu.au

ABSTRACT
Users of information retrieval systems employ a variety of strategies when searching for information. One factor that can directly influence how searchers go about their information finding task is the level of familiarity with a search topic. We investigate how the search behavior of domain experts changes based on their previous level of familiarity with a search topic, reporting on a user study of biomedical experts searching for a range of domain-specific material. The results of our study show that topic familiarity can influence the number of queries that are employed to complete a task, the types of queries that are entered, and the overall number of query terms. Our findings suggest that biomedical search systems should enable searching through a variety of querying modes, to support the different search strategies that users were found to employ depending on their familiarity with the information that they are searching for.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.4 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Systems and Software--Performance evaluation (effectiveness)
General Terms
Experimentation, Measurement, Performance
Keywords
Search engines, biomedical search, evaluation.
1. INTRODUCTION
Users of biomedical information retrieval systems employ a variety of strategies when searching for documents to satisfy an information need. Search behavior is affected by many different criteria such as topic of the search, the domain within which the search takes place, or the depth of the information need (for example, the user may be looking for comprehensive information on a topic, such as for systematic reviewing, or only looking for a brief answer).
We investigate the impact of level of topic familiarity on the search behavior of experts in the biomedical domain. In a controlled user study, 38 participants carried out a series of six search tasks. Our subjects were experts that had an educational background in biomedical sciences and related
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR'11, July 24­28, 2011, Beijing, China. ACM 978-1-4503-0757-4/11/07.

domains. For each task, users were asked to specify their prior familiarity with the topic. Based on this, we analyze how users differed in their formulation of specific queries.
Previous work on the relationship between topic familiarity and search behavior has established that when users are more familiar with a topic, they spend less time on search tasks, and are likely to find a higher number of relevant documents as a proportion of documents viewed [1], users who are more familiar with a topic are also likely to use a more controlled vocabulary when querying [2], search behavior changes when domain knowledge increases [4], and the level of expertise of the user can have a substantial impact on how their searches are conducted when carrying out searches in the biomedical domain [3]. White et al. [3] carried out a large-scale log-analysis where users were divided into expert and non-expert groups. In our study, all the users were experts in the domain, but their degree of familiarity with topics -- explicitly collected from our subjects -- varied based on their occupation or educational background.
2. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
To investigate the impact of topic familiarity on search behavior, we carried out a user study. Participants were recruited through advertisements in the staff and student mailing lists of Alfred Hospital, and Melbourne University. All were experts in the biomedical domain, from a variety of backgrounds. All participants had prior experience in carrying out electronic searches for information, although the frequency of this varied; more than half of the participants reported carrying out searches on at least a weekly basis.
Participants were asked to carry out informational searches for a series of six provided information needs. The search topics were all in the biomedical domain, and selected from a list of search tasks that had previously been referred to health librarians in the library of Alfred Hospital. Each task involved a complex relationship, for example "exercise therapy for cystic fibrosis". The searches were framed in a task scenario, with participants being asked to imagine that they needed to write a short report about each given topic, their goal being to carry out searches to find useful articles that they would want to read in order to prepare their report.
Searches were conducted using an in-house biomedical retrieval system, modeled on the interface of PubMed. All searches were run over the MEDLINE collection of biomedical journal article citations, as published by the US National Library of Medicine. Citations which did not contain an abstract were excluded from the experiments.

1135

Not familiar Familiar Very familiar 2 p-value

Tasks
147 71 10

Queries entered 438 (2.98) 204 (2.87) 14 (1.40)
8.1 0.0172

Ranked queries 154 (1.05) 51 (0.72) 5 (0.50)
7.65 0.0184

Boolean queries
271 (1.84) 148 (2.08)
9 (0.90)
6.8 0.0334

Complex Boolean 13 (0.09) 5 (0.07) 0 (0.00)
1.02 0.6511

Total query terms
1840 (13.24) 960 (15.92) 92 (9.20)
13.8 0.001

Result pages viewed
494 (3.36) 253 (3.56)
28 (2.80)
2.5 0.2801

Items saved 999 (6.80) 425 (5.99) 57 (5.70)
5.8 0.0535

Table 1: Difference in search behavior by familiarity with task. The table shows the sum for each category, with the mean indicated in parentheses. Reported p-values are for a 2 goodness-of-fit test (calculated by
Monte Carlo simulation for categories that have  5 observations).

3. FAMILIARITY AND SEARCH BEHAVIOR
The 38 participants in our user study carried out six search tasks each, giving a total of 228 tasks. After being presented with a topic, but before carrying out any searches, each participant was asked to indicate their prior familiarity with the topic on a 3 point scale: not familiar; familiar; or very familiar. As shown in the first column of Table 1, the level of familiarity across topics and participants is skewed, with 147 instances where there was no prior familiarity, and 10 instances of the topic being very familiar. These proportions therefore give a baseline against which other aspects of search behavior can be analyzed. Since the aspects of behavior to be analyzed are in the form of count data, a 2 goodness-of-fit test is used to evaluate the statistical significance of observed differences. To make the trends easier to interpret, we also report the mean values for each category.
The number of queries that users entered when carrying out a search session varied with their level of topic familiarity, as shown in column 2 of Table 1: for topics with a very high level of familiarity, users entered 1.4 queries on average, while topics with which users were not familiar led to an average of 3 queries (p = 0.0172).
Queries were also analyzed by the mode employed by users: ranked queries (a list of keywords with no special operators); Boolean queries (single line queries that employed at least one of the AND, OR and NOT operators); and complex Boolean queries (which made use of multi-line Boolean expressions, or employed advanced operators provided by many biomedical search systems such as specifying the field of a citation in which a term must occur). The number of ranked or Boolean queries employed by searchers varies significantly with the level of familiarity; note, however, that the relative popularity of query modes also varies, for example, for very familiar topics, a ranked query is only used for every second search topic, on average. Complex Boolean queries were very rarely used.
The total number of query terms used to carry out a search task also varies significantly with the level of topic familiarity, as shown in column six of the table. For very familiar topics, users employ fewer query terms across a search session, compared with topics for which they are only somewhat familiar or unfamiliar.
The number of individual search result pages viewed by users is shown in column seven (the experimental search system displayed 10 answers per page, with users being able to navigate through the larger answer set). There was no significant relationship between prior familiarity and the number of result pages viewed.
Task success can be measured by the number of items that a user selected as being useful for the information need (in the context of the user study, these are documents that

the user would have liked to read in full before writing their report on the search topic). The differences in the number of items saved does not vary significantly with topic familiarity.
4. DISCUSSION
Users of search systems in the biomedical domain differ in their searching behavior depending on their prior familiarity with a search topic. Users enter substantially fewer queries during a search session when they are more familiar with a topic. These trends hold across both ranked and Boolean query types. However, the relative popularity for Boolean queries is highest when users are at least somewhat familiar with the topic, while for ranked queries the maximum occurs when the topic is not familiar. The total number of query terms that users submit in a search session also varies significantly with their level of prior topic familiarity; substantially fewer query terms are entered when a user is highly familiar with a topic. On the other hand, the number of results pages that are viewed does not vary significantly with familiarity; users are prepared to look through similar numbers of results, but require fewer queries to find them when they are more familiar with the topic area.
Even when people are experts within a domain, their level of familiarity with individual topics can vary. Our results indicate that topic familiarity can substantially impact on the search behavior of users of biomedical search systems, both in the number of queries and query terms entered, but also in the preferred querying mode that is employed.
Acknowledgements: NICTA is funded by the Australian government as represented by Department of Broadband, Communication and Digital Economy, and the Australian Research Council through the ICT centre of Excellence programme. We thank A. Bromage, L. Cavedon, D. Newman, S. Pohl, and L. Yencken for their scientific input and technical support.
5. REFERENCES
[1] D. Kelly and C. Cool. The effects of topic familiarity on information search behavior. In JCDL, pages 74­75, Portland, Oregon, 2002.
[2] A. Shiri. Topic familiarity and its effects on term selection and browsing in a thesaurus-enhanced search environment. Library Review, 54(9):514­518, 2005.
[3] R. W. White, S. T. Dumais, and J. Teevan. Characterizing the influence of domain expertise on web search behavior. In WSDM, pages 132­141, Barcelona, Spain, 2009.
[4] B. Wildemuth. The effects of domain knowledge on search tactic formulation. JASIST, 55(3):246­258, 2004.

1136

