Region-Based Landmark Discovery by Crowdsourcing Geo-Referenced Photos

Yen-Ta Huang, An-Jung Cheng, Liang-Chi Hsieh, Winston Hsu, Kuo-Wei Chang

National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan

Chunghwa Telecom Co., Ltd., Taipei, Taiwan

ABSTRACT
We propose a novel model for landmark discovery that locates region-based landmarks on map in contrast to the traditional point-based landmarks. The proposed method preserves more information and automatically identifies candidate regions on map by crowdsourcing geo-referenced photos. Gaussian kernel convolution is applied to remove noises and generate detected region. We adopt F1 measure to evaluate discovered landmarks and manually check the association between tags and regions. The experiment results show that more than 90% of attractions in the selected city can be correctly located by this method.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search and Retrieval ­ Information filtering
General Terms
Experimentation, Human Factors.
Keywords
Region-based, crowdsourcing, geo-referenced photo.
1. INTRODUCTION
It is well observed that photo-sharing on Internet became a common behavior. These users upload photos with associated extra information (e.g. tags, geo-tags) to social websites such as Flickr. Recently many researchers leverage such freely available community-contributed photos to devise novel applications such as photo annotation and travel recommendation.
Related works such as [1] propose to locate landmarks on map with a point-based model which denotes a landmark as a circle or a point. For example, Fig. 1-b shows the famous landmark "Central Park" in Manhattan by several points. Such point-based model is limited since sampling by fixed (sometimes noisy) points.
In this work, we propose a novel region-based model for landmark discovery that locates landmarks with estimated regions on maps as Fig. 1(a). Compared with [1] which uses mean-shift (clustering) method and mines descriptive terms for landmarks from photo tags, our method uses the landmark candidate tags (e.g. "central park," mined automatically) to retrieve geo-referenced photos attached with these tags, and then estimates landmark boundaries. We can further associate the candidate tags with the automatically discovered regions (cf. Fig. 1(a)).
The basic assumption is that photos taken in the landmark can approximate the landmark region. To prove this assumption, we investigate the association between tags and locations. We found that the majority of photos in the cities are tagged with the names (or synonyms) of landmarks, but surely we also have to trim the
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR'11, July 24­28, 2011, Beijing, China. ACM 978-1-4503-0757-4/11/07.

Figure 1: Region-based vs. point-based method. (a) The 10 major landmark regions and associated tags automatically discovered by the proposed method. (b) Point-based landmarks by meanshift clustering suggested in prior work (e.g. [1]). Take "Central Park" and "Riverside Park" as examples. The two are rectangular and long-strip but identified correctly in our system, while are several random points in (b). Note that both results are based on the same geo-referenced photo collection.
wrongly tagged photos. To remove these noises, we use a Gaussian kernel, and set a cutting threshold as a filter. After filtering, we can automatically estimate the landmark region. Our evaluation shows that this method works well on landmark discovery, especially for large-region landmarks. For New York City and Taipei, more than 90% of the attractions can be found within the right place. Because the detected region depends on crowdsourcing tags, it can also give the reference boundaries of non-rigid attractions, such as trails, night markets, and those boundaries are difficult to define with point-based methods.

2. METHODS AND MATERIALS
2.1 Dataset
Our dataset is consisted of geo-tagged photos retrieved using Flickr API for the major cities including Manhattan, Taipei, Tokyo, London, Paris, Berlin, and San Francisco. We locate and download the photos, along with their metadata (e.g. tags, geo-tag, timestamp, and photographer), whose geo-locations are within the boundaries of these cities. Each city region can be determined by Geoname website and then treated as city map (cf. Fig. 2).

2.2 Methodology

Gaussian Kernel Our system retrieves the photo set whose tags

contain the names of candidates which can be either given by

users or mined from tags. We illustrate those retrieved photos as

points with their corresponding coordinates in the city map as Fig.

2 shows (before convolution); there are one or more dense areas

and some noises. Next we apply Gaussian kernel convolution to

remove the noises. The kernel is 2-D by Gaussian distribution.

(kernel is a

matrix) and (standard deviation)

are the parameters of kernel. We have conducted the sensitivity

1141

Figure 2: System Diagram

test for the parameters on some landmark attractions. We find that large kernel size is better for large regions, and vice versa.

Region Segmentation The next step is to decide the region

threshold to locate the estimated regions, seeded with the retrieved

geo-referenced photos. Define

,

where is the city map pixel value after convolution; we suggest

as

, which considers region connectivity for

optimizing segmentation. The detected region is the area with

pixel values greater than the threshold. For sensitivity test, we use

full-search method, and see how region detection score varies

with parameters. affects scores limitedly compared with .

The best kernel size depends on the shape of region that we want

to locate, but it is not practical to assume what the shape is. As we

find in the experiments, this method works better on large

landmark regions, because it can detect more precise boundaries

with more geo-referenced photos provided within the regions.

For boosting detection performance, we also include region segmentation algorithms such as graph cut and even consider Google map image coherences. However, the further adopted methods do not further improve the performance.

Candidate Tag Selection We locate landmark candidate terms from the noisy tags associated with geo-referenced photos by twostep method. The first step is a weak filter in combination of date, frequency, and author number. The second step is the boundary information mentioned as above. Assume that salient landmarks should satisfy two conditions: (a) the number of detected regions should only be few; (b) these detected regions should not be dispersed. Therefore, we reject the false landmark terms by the number of detected regions. We divide the city map into grids. The grids associated with the detected regions should be located within 8-neighbor to satisfy the condition (b). We find about 80% of mined candidates is exact the name of attractions. The other 20% are events, abbreviations, and characteristics of the landmark.

3. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
574K photos for Manhattan and 227K photos for Taipei from Flickr. To evaluate the results, it is necessary to define the ground-truth region, which is from Wikimapia with manually annotated regions by amateurs. We also apply the region images on Google Map to verify the results. Measure terms are defined as:

is the detected region; is the ground-truth region, and is intersection operator. Top10 attractions come from Yahoo! Travel.
Because we cannot estimate precision and recall for point-based method (c.f. Fig. 1-b), we do not compare it with our method. Using circles with points as the centers in order to denote regions on maps is not practical as it is difficult to decide the proper radius for those circles. We even find some points of point-based method are not in the correct regions due to unstable clustering.

Table 1: Top 10 Landmarks in Manhattan and segmentation

accuracy (by F1 measure).

Landmarks

F1

Landmarks

F1

Times Square

0.5380 Central Park

0.8436

St. Patrick's Cathedral

0.2857 Statue of Liberty N/A*

Metropolitan Museum of Art 0.5266

Yankee Stadium

0.6055

Chinatown

0.5351

Greenwich Village Brooklyn Bridge Chrysler Building

0.7293 0.1081 0.1579

Table 2: Top 10 Landmarks in Taipei. For both tables, the major

landmarks are with satisfying segmentation accuracy (F1 >0.5).

Landmarks

F1

Landmarks

F1

Taipei 101

0.2157 Tamshui Ferry Terminal

N/A*

Martyrs' Shrine

0.4554 Democracy Memorial Hall 0.8546

Yangming Park

N/A*

Sun Yat Sen Memorial Hall 0.8414

Shilin Night Market 0.5667 SOGO Taipei Store

0.5714

Tavern

?

Taipei City Zoo

0.6181

The experiment results are shown in Table 1. The "Statue of Liberty" is out of our city map. There are some landmarks in Table 1 with low F1. The main reason is the photographing behavior. People usually take photos of landmark "Brooklyn Bridge" when standing on the next bridge called "Manhattan Bridge." Another case is "Chrysler Building," a skyscraper. This kind of landmark can be seen from everywhere in the city. Besides, there is no large plaza existing in front of "St. Patrick's Cathedral," so people like to take photos of it across the street.
The results for Taipei are shown in Table 2. "Tamshui Ferry Terminal" and "Yangming Park" are not in the range of the investigated city map. We found that the ground-truth of "Tavern" is wrong. We check the Google Map by human and confirm that the estimated region by our method is correct. "Taipei 101" is a skyscraper too and thus suffers from a low F1 measure.
Observed from Table 1 and 2, we know that the association between region and attraction name is 100% in accuracy. Because if the association is wrong, the recall should be 0 (i.e., F1=0). It shows that our system can associate landmarks with correct tags.
Next, we want to justify the number of attractions that our system can locate, so we crawl attraction lists from Wiki-travel. We obtain 54 attractions for Manhattan, and 46 attractions for Taipei. 94% (51 of 54) from Manhattan can be found in the identified landmarks; 91% (42 of 46) from Taipei.
4. FUTURE WORK AND CONCLUSION
Compared with Wikimapia which is labor-intensive on tagging locations, our system can automatically and dynamically detect quality regions of interesting locations based on the freely available geo-referenced photos, Meanwhile, more than 90% of popular attractions can still be found within the right places by the proposed method. Such boundary information is very helpful for related applications such as tag mining, auto annotation, tour guide or recommendation. We also identify certain ways to improve, these emerging methods such as dealing with the photos taken inside buildings, photos of tall buildings, and the locations people cannot approach to take photos..
5. REFERENCES
[1] Crandall et al. Mapping the World's Photos. WWW 2009.
[2] Zhang et al. Tour the world: Building a web-scale landmark recognition engine. CVPR 2009.
[3] Singh et al. Social Pixels: Genesis and Evaluation. ACM MM 2010.

1142

