Search Task Difficulty: The Expected vs. The Reflected

Jingjing Liu
Southern Connecticut State University 501 Crescent Street, New Haven, CT 06515

Nicholas J. Belkin
Rutgers University 4 Huntington Street, New Brunswick, NJ 08901

jliujingjing@gmail.com

belkin@rutgers.edu

ABSTRACT
We report findings on how the user's perception of task difficulty changes before and after searching for information to solve tasks. We found that while in one type of task, the dependent task, this did not change, in another, the parallel task, it did. The findings have implications on designing systems that can provide assistance to users with their search and task solving strategies.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search and Retrieval ­ relevance feedback, search process.
General Terms
Measurement, Performance, Experimentation, Human Factors.
Keywords
Task difficulty, predicted difficulty, reflected difficulty, task type
1. INTRODUCTION
Current search engines do a good job in returning answers with easy and simple tasks, e.g., "when is the poster submission deadline for SIGIR 2011?" One can simply type in Google (http://www.google.com) the keywords "SIGIR 2011 poster deadline" and find the answer from the snippet of the top ranked search result. However, search systems do not do as well with somewhat difficult tasks, e.g., "collect information that is helpful to make a 2-week tour plan to 3 cities in China: Xi'an, Shanghai, and Chengdu." The complexity nature of the task as well as the user's lack of knowledge with these cities and the Chinese culture could all make the task be difficult. Better search systems are needed that can help people more easily locate useful information and more effectively solve such difficult tasks.
Task difficulty has been attracting quite some research attention. It is defined as a subjective perception assessed by task doers [4], and could be formed both pre- and post-task [3]. Task difficulty has been found to be a significant factor influencing users' search behaviors and search performance. In difficult tasks, users are more likely to visit more web pages ([2][3][5]), issue more queries ([1][3][5]), and spend longer total time ([1][5]) and first dwell time [5] on search result pages. These findings in the relationship between users' behaviors and task difficulty suggest that it is possible to predict the difficulty level of a task from the users' search behaviors. Further, researchers have found that the relationship between search behaviors and task difficulty varies in different types of tasks such as in factual, interpretive, and exploratory [3], or in fact-finding and information gathering [5].
Even though a system can predict, from observing the user's behaviors, that he is having difficulty with his search, the system
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR'11, July 24­28, 2011, Beijing, China. ACM 978-1-4503-0757-4/11/07.

cannot help the user overcome the difficulty unless it has a further understanding on the nature of task difficulty. The following research questions need to be answered: 1) Does a user's perception of the level of task difficulty change along the search and task solving process? 2) Does this change of difficulty perception vary in different task types?

2. METHOD
Data came from a 3-session lab experiment designed to examine users' behavioral and performance changes while searching for information to perform a task. A total of 24 college students participated, each coming 3 times in a 2-week period working on one assigned general task which had 3 sub-tasks. Each participant was asked to write a 3-section article on hybrid cars, each section being finished in one session based on one sub-task of his/her choice. Half of the participants worked on a parallel task (PT), which asked them to prepare an article comparing the Honda Civic, Nissan Altima and Toyota Camry hybrid cars. The 3 subtasks were parallel to each other. The other half worked on a dependent task (DT), which asked them to a) explore which car manufactures produce hybrid cars, b) identify 3 mid-priced hybrid cars, and c) compare the three cars' pros and cons. The accomplishment of some sub-tasks was assumed to be dependent upon that of others. Participants self-determined the order of the 3 sub-tasks in either task.
Both general tasks were in the same subject domain, had the same general requirements, and had the same levels of complexity (3 sub-tasks); their only difference is in task structure. At the beginning of the experiment, participants were asked to rate, on a 7-point scale (1=not, 7=very), how difficult they felt the task would be, i.e., their pre-task or expected task difficulty. At the end of the 3rd session, they were asked to rate how difficult the task was, i.e., their post-task or reflected task difficulty. In addition, in the beginning and the end of each session, each participant was also asked to rate the expected (pre-session) and reflected (postsession) sub-task difficulty.

3. RESULTS & DISCUSSION
3.1 Difficulty comparison of two general tasks
The difficulty ratings being not normally distributed, nonparametric Mann-Whitney U test was used to compare the difficulty of the two general tasks. Results (Table 1) show no significant difference in user ratings for the two tasks either before
Table 1. Pre- and post-task difficulty ratings in two tasks

Difficulty type

Mean (standard deviation) Dependent task Parallel task

U(p)

Pre-task

2.83 (1.34)

2.58 (0.90) 61.5 (0.551)

Post-task

2.92 (1.31)

2.08 (0.90) 43.5 (0.101)

1183

or after they worked on them. This was reasonable given that both tasks were in the same domain and their general requirements were the same.
3.2 Expected vs. reflected general task difficulty
A non-parametric Wilcoxon test was used to compare users' expected and reflected general task difficulty. Results (Figure 1) show that in the DT, there was no significant difference between users' ratings on these two types of difficulty. However, in the PT, after working on the whole task, users felt that the general task was not as difficult as they expected in the beginning of the experiment (W(11)=4.5, p=.034). Since both tasks had multiple sub-tasks, it is reasonable to look at the sub-task difficulty for further analyses. Figure 1. Pre- vs. post-task difficulty in individual tasks
3.3 Expected vs. reflected sub-task difficulty
The Wilcoxon test was used to compare the expected vs. the reflected sub-task difficulty in individual sessions. Results show that in the DT, in any session, as well as in 3 sessions on average, the expected and the reflected sub-task difficulty were not significantly different. Figure 2. Pre- vs. post-session sub-task difficulty in individual tasks
In the PT, no changes were found between users' expected and reflected difficulty of the sub-tasks in individual sessions. However, in all 3 sessions on average, Figure 2, users had a

significantly lower rating on the sub-tasks' perceived difficulty than expected (W(35)=37.5, p=.015), meaning that they found the task less difficult after working on the sub-task than before. One reason could be that in the PT, although the topics of the sub-tasks were new each time, users found that the structure of the sub-task was similar, leading to a lower reflected difficulty rating. These results correspond with those in Section 3.2. It is possible that the users' perceptions of difficulty of the sub-tasks led to their perceptions of the difficulty of the general tasks.
4. CONCLUSIONS
Task difficulty requires in-depth understanding in order to build systems that can help users when they have difficult tasks to solve. We conducted analyses of users' ratings on the difficulty levels of the general multi-session tasks, as well as sub-tasks. Our results show that while the topics of two different types of tasks are the same, and their general task difficulty levels are comparable, users felt that one type of task, the PT, was in fact not as difficult as it looked like before they searched for information to solve the task. However, for the DT, users found it as difficult afterwards as before they worked on it. Further analysis shows that this corresponds to users' perceptions of sub-tasks' difficulty levels before and after they worked on the sub-tasks.
The findings of this study have implications for two aspects of search system design. First, the user's perception of a task's difficulty level could change along the way of searching for information to solve the task. In order for the systems to be able to provide help to users when they have difficulty, systems should be able to monitor this change along users' search process. Second, the above-mentioned change of the user's perception of a task's difficulty can be different in different task types. Systems could be designed to provide assistance for users in solving difficult tasks, not only by returning better results for queries and suggesting queries based on semantic meaning, but also by offering suggestions in their task solving strategies. Decomposing a task into several parallel sub-tasks rather than dependent sub-tasks could lead users to feel the task less difficult; systems could make query suggestions that help the users to solve a general task through parallel sub-tasks.
5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by IMLS grant LG-06-07-0105-07.
6. REFERENCES
[1] Aula, A., Khan, R. & Guan, Z. (2010). How does search behavior change as search becomes more difficult? CHI `10, 35-44.
[2] Gwizdka, J., Spence, I. (2006). What can searching behavior tell us about the difficulty of information tasks? A study of Web navigation. ASIS&T `06.
[3] Kim, J. (2006). Task difficulty as a predictor and indicator of web searching interaction. CHI `06, 959-964.
[4] Li, Y. & Belkin, N.J. (2008). A faceted approach to conceptualizing tasks in information seeking. Information Processing & Management, 44, 1822-1837.
[5] Liu, J., Gwizdka, J., Liu C., & Belkin, N.J. (2010). Predicting task difficulty for different task types. ASIS&T `10.

1184

