A Model for Expert Finding in Social Networks
Elena Smirnova
INRIA Sophia Antipolis - Méditerranée, France
elena.smirnova@inria.fr

ABSTRACT
Expert finding is a task of finding knowledgeable people on a given topic. State-of-the-art expertise retrieval algorithms identify matching experts based on analysis of textual content of documents experts are associated with. While powerful, these models ignore social structure that might be available. In this paper, we develop a Bayesian hierarchical model for expert finding that accounts for both social relationships and content. The model assumes that social links are determined by expertise similarity between candidates. We demonstrate the improved retrieval performance of our model over the baseline on a realistic data set.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search and Retrieval
General Terms: Algorithms, Experimentation
1. INTRODUCTION
A large class of information needs requires a personal contact between a user and a knowledgeable person. These questions typically include details of background and context that are too specific to be addressed in existing documents [4]. In these cases, a user is looking for a person who can apply his knowledge on the topic to a special problem.
The task of identifying knowledgeable person on a given topic is known as expert finding task [3]. State-of-the-art expert finding algorithms model the knowledge areas of candidate experts from textual content of associated documents [1]. So far, social information was solely used to correct contentbased expert scores [5]. In this work, we are interested in jointly modeling person's expertise and social network in a unified way. To this end, we develop a generative model for expert finding of both social links and content.
To model the text, we build on the previous work--AuthorTopic (AT) model [6]--that models author's topics of expertise, called topical profile. We then assume that social links are generated based on similarity between topical profiles of persons. As a result, our model strengthens person's level of expertise in the topic that is also presented in the profiles of linked persons. Indeed, social networks demonstrate homogeneity with regard to many characteristics.
In the next section, we develop our model from the AT model. Then, we evaluate predictive performance of these
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR'11, July 24­28, 2011, Beijing, China. ACM 978-1-4503-0757-4/11/07.

models and compare their retrieval scores against the expert finding baseline with social network based smoothing [5].

2. THE MODEL

In this section we explain our model based on the AT model. The AT model extends latent Dirichlet allocation model by adding authorship information--see Figure 1 (Left). Specifically, it assumes the following generative process.

For each author em, m = 1 . . . M and topic tk, k = 1 . . . K: 1. Draw author's topic proportions m|  Dirichlet() 2. Draw topic's word proportions k|µ  Dirichlet()

For each document d, author set Ed and each word wd,n: 3. Draw author ed,n|Ed  Uniform(Ed) 4. Draw topic zd,n|ed,n, 1:M  Multinomial(ed,n ) 5. Draw word wd,n|zd,n, 1:K  Multinomial(zd,n )
Our work further extends the AT model by adding social network between persons--see Figure 1 (Right). We assume that social links are generated based on similarity between topical profiles. This results in a profile strengthen effect: the model is more confident of person's expertise in the topic that is presented in profiles of linked persons. Formally, we define the link generation process as follows.

For each social link ymm = 1 between experts em and em : 6. Draw social link ymm |z, e  exp(z¯m · z¯m )

The above link generation function is a composition of

two: (i) the similarity measure between topical profiles, and

(ii) the measure of the effect of this similarity on link forma-

tion. The former function is represented by the dot prod-

uct of mean topic assignments, z¯m · z¯m , where mean topic

assignment for topic t and expert e is defined as z¯e,t =

11 D Nd

d

n 1 (zd,n = t, ed,n = e) . The latter function is given

by exponential function, proposed in [2]. It returns values

that increase exponentially as topical profiles get closer.

With the model defined, we now turn to approximate pos-

terior inference. We present a collapsed Gibbs sampling pro-

cedure that jointly samples an expert ed,n and a topic zd,n

for the word wd,n, given all other topic and expert assign-

ments, denoted by z-(d,n) and e-(d,n):

p(zd,n = t, ed,n = e|wd,n = w, z-(d,n), e-(d,n), w, y, Ed, , ) 





w + NwWtT

(N W T
wt

+ w

w

)

t

t + NtTeE

(N T E
te

+

t

1

exp 

)

 Ne e :yee

=1

NtTeE  NTE 
te t

where NW T , NT E denote word-topic and topic-expert count matrices respectively, the sum under the exponent is taken over the set of experts linked to e and Ne is the size of

1191

(a) AT model

(b) This work

Figure 1: Graphical models. Shaded (unshaded) nodes represent observed (latent) random variables. Edges indicate conditional dependency between the variables.

this set. The last term differentiate our model from the AT model. It favors topic assignments to an expert that are also presented in counts of linked experts. We can view this term as a regularizer to topic model with social network. The posterior distributions on  and  remain the same as in the AT model:

p(t|e) =

t + NtTeE

t

(N T E
te

+ t

, )

p(w|t) =

w + NwWtT

w

(N W T
wt

+ w

)

Finally, the probability of an expert e to be knowledgeable in query-topic q is the product of the probabilities of terms over the expert's topical profile:

p(e|q) =

p(w|t )p(t|e )

(1)

wq t

3. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
We experimented on the English subset of the UvT Expert Collection [1], created from a publicly available database of employees involved in research or teaching at Tilburg University (UvT), The Netherlands. It contains heterogeneous information about 1,168 experts, namely 19,127 documents of four types: research descriptions, course descriptions, publications, and personal homepages. The UvT employees could select their expertise areas from a predefined set of 981 topics. These self-assigned topic labels are treated as relevance judgements. We extracted a social network based on the university hierarchy and researchers' publications included in the UvT collection. The resulted network links scientific collaborators and employees that belong to one department--in total 20,720 undirected connections.
From the data set we first investigate the validity of our assumption, i.e. social links positively correlate with similarity of persons' expertise. As a similarity score we calculated the Jaccard coefficient between sets of self-assigned expertise areas. In Figure 2 (Left), we show the density of positive similarity scores conditioned on whether there is a link between experts. We observe a larger similarity for linked experts on all examples.
Next, we trained the AT model and the proposed model using Gibbs sampling procedure. We set symmetric Dirichlet priors  = 50/K and  = 0.01, where K is the number of topics. For different K, we ran 10 different Markov chains for a fixed number of 500 iterations. We compare the models from two perspectives: as probabilistic models, where we evaluate their predictive distributions, and as retrieval models, where we compare retrieval scores.
We evaluated the predictive distributions of the models on the test set of held-out links and documents (10% of the data set). We measured how well the models predict the unseen links and words using perplexity [6] against different number

Table 1: Results of retrieval evaluation. () denote significant difference against the baseline at significance level  = 0.01(0.001) computed using two-tailed paired t-test.

LM baseline
AT model This work

MAP
.2038 .2188(+7%) .2763(+35%)

MRR .3567
.3515 .3940(+10%)

P@5
.1359 .1764(+23%) .2143(+57%)

Density
Word perplexity Link perplexity

·10-2 3
2
1
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 Jaccard coefficient

1,800 1,700 1,600 1,500 1,400 1,300 1,200 1,100
100

200 300 400 Number of topics

100 80 60 40 500

Words: AT model This work
Links: AT model This work

Figure 2: Left: Distributions of expertise similarity given the social link (white) or not (grey). Right: Word and link perplexity against the number of topics. Lower is better.

of topics--see Figure 2 (Right). Here lower values indicate better prediction. The proposed model outperforms the AT model in both tasks and thus, is able to better capture the joint structure of words and social links. Note that the word perplexity of the models decreases as the number of topics is increasing. In contrast, the link performance worsens for the AT model and generally improves for our model.
We performed retrieval evaluation of the AT model and the proposed model against the language modeling (LM) algorithm with smoothing over connected experts [5]--see Table 1. The weighting parameter of LM baseline was set to best reported value of 0.9. We evaluated the lists of persons ranked according to Eq. 1 for the best performing number of topics K = 400. The performance of the AT model is close to the LM baseline. At the same time, we see a notable improvement for our model over the baseline on all retrieval measures.

4. CONCLUSIONS
We presented a Bayesian hierarchical model for expert finding that jointly models content and social links between experts. Experiments showed that this model improves over the expert finding baseline. Future work is aimed at investigation of different link probability functions.
The author was supported by INRIA, CORDI fellowship and AxIS team via the EC funded Elliot project. Travel support was provided by SIGIR and Google Travel Grant.

5. REFERENCES
[1] K. Balog, T. Bogers, L. Azzopardi, M. de Rijke, and A. van den Bosch. Broad expertise retrieval in sparse data environments. In SIGIR '07, pages 551­558. ACM, 2007.
[2] J. Chang and D. Blei. Hierarchical relational models for document networks. Annals of Applied Statistics, 4(1):124­150, 2010.
[3] N. Craswell, A. P. de Vries, and I. Soboroff. Overview of the TREC-2005 Enterprise Track. In TREC'06, 2006.
[4] D. Horowitz and S. D. Kamvar. The anatomy of a large-scale social search engine. In WWW '10, pages 431­440. ACM, 2010.
[5] M. Karimzadehgan, R. W. White, and M. Richardson. Enhancing expert finding using organizational hierarchies. In ECIR'09, pages 177­188, 2009.
[6] M. Steyvers, P. Smyth, M. Rosen-Zvi, and T. Griffiths. Probabilistic author-topic models for information discovery. In KDD'04, pages 306­315, 2004.

1192

