Knowledge Effects on Document Selection in Search Results Pages

Michael J. Cole1 m.cole@rutgers.edu

Xiangmin Zhang2

Chang Liu1

xiangminz@gmail.com changl@eden.rutgers.edu

Nicholas J. Belkin1 belkin@rutgers.edu

Jacek Gwizdka1 sigir2011@gwizdka.com

1Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey School of Communication and Information New Brunswick, New Jersey 08901

2Wayne State University School of Library and Information Science
Detroit, Michigan 80202

Click through events in search results pages (SERPs) are not reliable implicit indicators of document relevance. A user's task and domain knowledge are key factors in recognition and link selection and the most useful SERP document links may be those that best match the user's domain knowledge. User study participants rated their knowledge of genomics MeSH terms before conducting 2004 TREC Genomics Track tasks. Each participant's document knowledge was represented by their knowledge of the indexing MeSH terms. Results show high, intermediate, and low domain knowledge groups had similar document selection SERP rank distributions. SERP link selection distribution varied when participant knowledge of the available documents was analyzed. High domain knowledge participants usually selected a document with the highest personal knowledge rating. Low domain knowledge participants were reasonably successful at selecting available documents of which they had the most knowledge, while intermediate knowledge participants often failed to do so. This evidence for knowledge effects on SERP link selection may contribute to understanding the potential for personalization of search results ranking based on user domain knowledge.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search and Retrieval--relevance feedback, search process
General Terms
Performance, Design, Human Factors.
Keywords
knowledge effects, user study, personalization, information search behavior
1. INTRODUCTION AND RELATED WORK
Individual click through events in SERPs are not a reliable predictor of document relevance, due, in part, to user habitual rank selection bias [3, 2] which may be explained by user
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR'11, July 24­28, 2011, Beijing, China. ACM 978-1-4503-0757-4/11/07.

expectations of successful interpretation of their query. Alternatively, user SERP selection actions may be dominated by active evaluation of relevance hints in the links [4]. Domain knowledge or expertise has been shown to affect search behaviors [6, 7] and this work addresses the question of domain knowledge effects on click through.

2. METHODOLOGY

Undergraduate and graduate students (n=40) in biology-

related programs rated their knowledge of 409 genomics-

related MeSH terms (1­'No knowledge', 5­'Can explain to

others'). They then performed four recall-oriented search

tasks from the 2004 TREC Genomics Track using the In-

dri search system with Medline abstracts (n=1.85 million).

Search interactions were recorded using a multi-source log-

ging system [1]. Technical reasons prevented analysis of two

participants.

The participant domain knowledge (PDK) was calculated

as P DK =

m i=1

(ki

ti

)

5m

,

where

ki

is

the

term

knowledge

rat-

ing and i ranges over the terms. ti is 1 if rated or 0 if not.

The sum is normalized by a hypothetical expert who rated

all terms as 'can explain to others'. Hierarchical cluster-

ing identified high domain knowledge (HDK) (n=5), inter-

mediate domain knowledge (IDK) (n=21), and low domain

knowledge (LDK) (n=12) groups.

For each document, the MeSH index terms were matched

with the participant's self-reported term knowledge. We

used the highest level of knowledge amongst the terms as

the document knowledge representation. There is low cov-

erage of participant-rated terms in the MeSH indexing space,

so many document indexing terms could not be matched.

To reduce learning and knowledge interaction effects, only

the first document selected in a SERP was considered. To

reduce interface behavior effects, we analyzed cases where

the first selected document was in the top five ranks that

were available on the display without scrolling.

3. RESULTS
Figure 1 shows the rank distribution of selected documents by domain knowledge. There is little group variation.
Figure 2 shows the distribution of link selections by document knowledge representation. The actual selection distribution is contrasted with the distribution if the group

1219

0.4

Low Domain Knowledge (LDK) (12) High domain Knowledge (HDK) (5) Intermediate domain Knowledge (IDK) (21)

0.3

0.2

Probability density function

0.1

IDK LDK
HDK

0.0

1

2

3

4

5

Selected document rank

Figure 1: Domain knowledge and rank selection bias
Low Domain Knowledge (LDK) (12) High domain Knowledge (HDK) (5) Intermediate domain Knowledge (IDK) (21) LDK
IDK

Probability density function 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30

HDK

LDK IDK
HDK

As selected If optimal selection

0

1

2

3

4

5

Maximum of document term knowledge

Figure 2: Link selection by indexing term knowledge

participants had always selected a document in the SERP containing the highest-rated indexing term.
The HDK group often selected a document that was the 'best' available. The LDK group was further from optimal. The IDK group was least likely to select the best available documents. Although the number of knowledge level 0 cases (no rated terms in any of the SERP documents) was similar for each group, and knowledge level 1 (highest rated term in all of the SERP documents was 'no knowledge') was similar for HDK and IDK, both the LDK and IDK groups selected one of these suboptimal documents relatively frequently.
4. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
Assuming suitable topicality, documents of which a user has the greatest knowledge are the most likely to be accessible to them. These conceptually accessible documents represent better opportunities to extend user knowledge in ways that contribute to their task goal. That is, such documents are more likely to be useful. The observed differences between the 'as selected' and 'optimal selection' curves in figure 2 might be regarded as a measure of the potential for

personalization of SERP results in the spirit of [5]. HDK participants were effective in such discrimination between document links. Despite a selection handicap for LDK users ­ there were few documents available with high knowledge indexing terms ­ they were rather effective for documents with highest term ratings of 2 ("vague idea") and 3 ("some knowledge"). This suggests some success for LDK users in discriminating amongst their choices. The IDK group was least successful in getting to the 'best' links.
The results provide evidence for knowledge effects in SERP link selection and suggest that high knowledge users are better able to discriminate between documents with different knowledge levels. The strong rank bias of high knowledge users may be explained by effective query formulation whose results were ranked by the user's knowledge of the links.
In many task sessions a user gains knowledge as they work towards their goal. These selection behavior observations on low, intermediate, and high domain knowledge groups may be considered from the perspective of changing factors affecting selection behavior for a single user within a task session. With respect to user knowledge, the potential for personalization of SERP link selection may therefore change over a session with the greatest potential in the earlier stages. Early possession of information about a user's knowledge might therefore be important to optimize interactive information retrieval performance. Unfortunately, this is hard to accomplish at the search server for several reasons. One solution may be client-side domain knowledge modeling and cooperation with a search service.
5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
IMLS grant LG-06-07-0105-07 supported this work.
6. REFERENCES
[1] Bierig, R., Cole, M. J., Gwizdka, J., and Belkin, N. J. A data analysis and modelling framework for the evaluation of interactive information retrieval. In Proceedings of ECIR 2010, (Milton Keynes, UK 2010) (2010), C. Gurrin et al., Eds., vol. 5993 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer, pp. 673­674.
[2] Joachims, T., Granka, L., Pan, B., Hembrooke, H., Radlinski, F., and Gay, G. Evaluating the accuracy of implicit feedback from clicks and query reformulations in web search. TOIS 25, 2 (2007), 7.
[3] Pan, B., Hembrooke, H., Joachims, T., Lorigo, L., Gay, G., and Granka, L. In Google we trust: Users decisions on rank, position, and relevance. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 12, 3 (2007), 801­823.
[4] Pirolli, P. Information Foraging Theory, 1st ed. Oxford University Press, New York, 2007.
[5] Teevan, J., Dumais, S. T., and Horvitz, E. Potential for personalization. TOCHI 17, 1 (March 2010), 1­31.
[6] White, R. W., Dumais, S. T., and Teevan, J. Characterizing the influence of domain expertise on web search behavior. In Proceedings of WSDM (2009), ACM New York, NY, USA, pp. 132­141.
[7] Zhang, X., Anghelescu, H., and Yuan, X. Domain knowledge, search behavior, and search effectiveness of engineering and science students: An exploratory study. Information Research 10, 2 (2005), 217.

1220

