Predicting Users' Domain Knowledge from Search Behaviors

Xiangmin Zhang
Wayne State University 106 Kresge Library Detroit, MI 48202 +1 877-263-2665
xiangminz@gmail.com

Michael Cole
Rutgers University, 4 Huntington Street New Brunswick, NJ 80910
+1 732-932-7500 m.cole@rutgers.edu

Nicholas J. Belkin Rutgers University 4 Huntington Street New Brunswick, NJ 80910
+1 732-932-7500 belkin@rutgers.edu

ABSTRACT
This study uses regression modeling to predict a user's domain knowledge level (DK) from implicit evidence provided by certain search behaviors. A user study (n=35) with recall-oriented search tasks in the genomic domain was conducted.. A number of regression models of a person's DK, were generated using different behavior variable selection methods. The best model highlights three behavior variables as DK predictors: the number of documents saved, the average query length, and the average ranking position of documents opened. The model is validated using the split sampling method. Limitations and future research directions are discussed.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.4 [Systems and Software]: User profiles and alert services
General Terms
Measurement, Experimentation, Human Factors.
Keywords
User modeling, domain knowledge modeling, domain knowledge prediction, information retrieval, user studies
1 INTRODUCTION
Users of information retrieval (IR) systems have varying degrees of domain knowledge (DK). DK has been found to affect user search tactics and search performance [2], [5]. Automated prediction of DK is desirable and at least one algorithm has been reported using search log data to make binary classifiers (high or low DK) (White et. al. [4]). The current study develops a regression model for user DK from a rich data set of user behaviors collected in a controlled study. These behaviors are observable in computer interaction logs as they involve query properties, SERP link behavior and document use. Such behaviorbased models can predict the user's DK level and permit systems to be personalized by adapting to the user's knowledge level. We treat DK as a continuous dependent variable to be predicted from distinct types of search behaviors and use multivariate regression modeling. Different variable selection methods are used to build alternative models for comparison.
2 RESEARCH DESIGN
2.1 Search system and collection
An IR system was implemented using the Indri search engine from the Lemur toolkit. The data set was the 2000-2004 portion of
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR'11, July 24­28, 2011, Beijing, China. ACM 978-1-4503-0757-4/11/07.

the TREC Genomics Track collection (n=1.85 million). Thirty five students, both graduate and undergraduate, from biologyrelated schools and departments participated in the study.
2.2 Assessment of domain knowledge
The participants' DK was assessed in two ways: a) Before any of the search sessions, participants rated their
understanding of the MeSH terms in three genomics-related MeSH concept trees: Genetic processes (G05), genetic phenomena (G13), and genetic structures (G14). We used an anchored scale to capture knowledge judgments: 1 for "no knowledge", 2 for "vague idea", 3 for "some knowledge", 4 for "high knowledge", and 5 for "can explain to others". b) Before each search task, after reading the task description participants were asked to rate both their expertise and familiarity with the search topic using a 7-point scale, from 1: 'not at all' to 7: 'extremely'. This scale was used to provide uniformity over all of the pre-task questions.
A participant's DK score is calculated as: DK=((Z(MeSH-rating) + Z((familiarity+expertise ratings)/2))/2
The mean of a participant's MeSH term ratings was calculated. Then the average of the participant's pre-task topic familiarity and expertise ratings was calculated. Since different scales were used for the MeSH and pre-task questionnaire ratings, the values were transformed to Z-scores. The mean of the two Z-scores provides the participant's DK score. This DK score is taken to represent a participant's task knowledge level.
2.3 Search tasks
Five search tasks were selected, based on their MeSH categories and the number of relevant documents available, from among 50 TREC Genomics Track topics. The topics and their corresponding MeSH categories are listed in Table 1.

Topic # 2
7 42
45 49

Table 1. Search Topics/Tasks

MeSH Category

Topic Keywords

Genetic structure

Generating transgenic mice

Genetic processes Genetic phenomena

DNA repair and oxidative stress
Genes altered by chromosome translocations

Genetic phenomena Mental Health Wellness-1

Genetic structure

Glyphosate tolerance gene sequence

1225

2.4 User search behaviors
Three categories of search behaviors are considered in this study: querying behaviors; document selection/viewing behaviors, and the general task interaction behaviors, such as the number of actions per task, task completion time, and so on. More than 15 behavior variables were analyzed in this study.

2.5 Procedure
The user experiment was conducted in the work-task framework proposed by Borlund [1]. The participants were asked to rate the selected portion of MeSH terms first. Then they would complete the pre-task questionnaire, which was followed by conducting searches on the experimental system. Tasks were systematicallyrotated in balanced blocks. Participants saved documents during the search and evaluated their level of relevance after completing the search. After evaluation of the documents for the search task, a post-task questionnaire was administered. The experiment was conducted in a human-computer interaction lab, and each participant was tested individually. The participant-system interaction was logged by computer software.

2.6 Multiple regression analysis
The collected user behavior data was analyzed using multiple regression analysis [3]. The generic multiple regression model is expressed as:

y=a + b1x1 + b2x2 + ... + bkxk

(1)

where y is the predicted value of the dependent variable, a the constant parameter, b coefficients, and x1-k are predicting variables. Both a and b1...bk must be determined from the sample population data.

To predict DK from search behavior variables, we can use DK as y, and the distinct search behavior variables as x1-xx. The main research question is to identify the collection of behavior variables that do the best job of predicting the calculated task DK of the participants.

3 RESULTS
3.1 Variable selection
There are over 15 behavior variables involved in the study. We evaluated the meaningfulness of the variables used in the regression analysis using Pearson correlation analysis. First we looked at the relationship between these behavior variables and DK on the data set aggregated for all participants and all tasks. Eight significant behavior variables were identified (Table 3) and they were used as the candidate predictors in the multiple regression analysis.

3.2 The optimal model
Several standard techniques exist for selection of the most discriminative variables to include in a multiple regression model [3]. Using all candidate variables generated in 3.1, the stepwise estimation method and the backward elimination method were employed in analysis. In addition, we generated a model using all of the candidate variables as a standard for model comparison. Each method generated several models with different combinations of predictors.

Table 3. Behavior variables identified (n=140)

Behavior Variable Variable Interpretation Corr/Sig.

Q_length
Saved Viewed Ratio numTaskActions numSerps

mean query length (# of words) # of documents saved # of documents viewed
ratio of saved to viewed mean # of actions per task mean # of SERPs accessed

.344/.000
.357/.000 .285/.001 .250/.003 .274/.001 .201/.017

Task_T Rel_mean

mean task completion time (in second)
mean ranking position of the docs opened in SERPs

.174/.039 .277/.001

We compared the models using model fit, model significance, and the contributions of individual predictors in each model. The stepwise model provided the best model, with an adjusted R2 value of 0.265. This R2 value is reasonably good for predicting human behaviors. This DK model fitted to the sample data is:

DK=-1.466+0.039Saved+0.147Q_length+0.130Rel_mean

(2)

This model suggests that a user's DK is indicated by the number of documents saved, the user's average query length, and the average SERP rank position of opened documents.

4 DISCUSSION
The stepwise model (equation 2) was validated by using the split sampling method. However, generalizability of the model needs to be further investigated because the data was collected in a controlled experiment and from only one domain. The contribution of this research is that it may enable real-time observation and prediction of a user's level of DK, supporting knowledge-based personalization of information retrieval systems.
5 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by IMLS grant LG-06-07-0105-07.
6 REFERENCES
[1] Borlund, P. The IIR evaluation model: A framework for evaluation of interactive information retrieval systems. Information Research, 8(3), 152 (2003)
[2] Duggan, G.B. & Payne, S.J.: Knowledge in the head and on the web: Using topic expertise to aid search. In Proceedings of SIGCHI, 39-48 (2008)
[3] Hair, J. Jr., et al.: Multivariate Data Analysis, 5th ed. Prentice Hall, New Jersey (1998)
[4] White, R., Dumais, S.T., & Teevan, J.: Characterizing the influence of domain expertise on Web search behavior. In Proceedings of WSDM 2009 (2009)
[5] Zhang, X., Anghelescu, H.G.B. & Yuan, X.: Domain knowledge, search behavior, and search effectiveness of engineering and science students. Information Research, 10(2), 217(2005).

1226

