A Bipartite Graph Based Social Network Splicing Method for Person Name Disambiguation
Jintao Tang1, 2, Qin Lu1, Ting Wang2, Ji Wang3, Wenjie Li1
1Department of Computing, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong 2College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, P.R. China
3National Laboratory for Parallel and Distributed Processing, Changsha, P.R. China

{tangjintao, tingwang, wj}@nudt.edu.cn, {csluqin,cswjli}@comp.polyu.edu.hk

ABSTRACT
The key issue of person name disambiguation is to discover different namesakes in massive web documents rather than simply cluster documents by using textual features. In this paper, we describe a novel person name disambiguation method based on social networks to effectively identify namesakes. The social network snippets in each document are extracted. Then, the namesakes are identified via splicing the social networks of each namesake by using the snippets as a bipartite graph. Experimental results show that our method achieves better result than the top performance of WePS-2 in identifying different namesakes.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage Retrieval]: Information Search and Retrieval--Clustering; I.2.7 [Artificial Intelligence]: Natural Language Processing--Text analysis
General Terms
Algorithms, Experimentation
Keywords
Person name disambiguation, Social network, Bipartite graph.
1. INTRODUCTION
Name is not a unique identifier for a person. Normally, when you search for a person, say, "Andrew McCallum", a search engine will use it as a keyword and return pages relevant to any person with this name without distinguishing different "Andrew McCallum"s. Recently, person name disambiguation has become as an open challenge in many web-mining areas such as social network extraction, web people search and so on.

based person name disambiguation method using social network information directly. First, we represent each document by the social network snippet of a specific person. Then an effective bipartite graph based similarity measure is used to splice these snippets. As a result, different namesakes are identified and their
social networks are generated. Experimental results show that
the method has good ability of identify different namesakes.
2. Algorithm Design
Let n denotes a name entity. The set of webpages mentioned n, including its variants, is denoted by Dn  {d1,d2,,dk}. All the names that co-occur with n in di, referred as its neighbors and denoted by sj, forms the social network snippet for n as di  {s1, s2,, sm}. Variants of si are also resolved and included to address the co-reference problem. The variants of n include abbreviated forms, last name and first name rotated forms, middle name initialized forms, middle name dropped forms, and combinations of them. From the relationship between n and its neighbors, we can construct a candidate-neighbor bipartite graph with the set of candidate nodes Cn and the set of neighbor nodes Sn as follows. A candidate node ci is created for each possible specific namesake of n. First, each document di in Dn is considered as a candidate node. A neighbor node sj is created for each name entity in the documents. A social edge eij is created between the candidate node ci and a neighbor node sj if sj cooccur with n in the same paragraph in ci. The weight wij of edge eij is the normalized frequency when both sj and n occur in the same paragraph of di. Figure 1 shows an example of a candidateneighbor graph.

Recent works on person name disambiguation were reported at the WePS workshops [1]. The typical approach uses the set of webpages that contain the person name to cluster the pages based on the features contained in the pages [2]. However, we thought that the most important issue is to pinpoint each specific namesake based on the features that can uniquely identify them.
It is reasonable to assume that different namesakes have different social circles. Social network information can be a discriminative feature to identify the different namesakes. Existing works use social networks as common word co-occurrence features [3, 4]. However, there usually are millions of webpages mentioned the searched name n, so the names that co-occur with n in these webpages are high dimensional for the set, yet sparse in each document. The sparseness of feature in the aforementioned techniques is problematic. Since social networks are more like relational data, its network structure should be more useful to identify a specific person. This paper proposes a bipartite graph
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR'11, July 24­28, 2011, Beijing, China. ACM 978-1-4503-0757-4/11/07.

Figure 1. An Example of Candidate-Neighbor Bipartite.

Then we can cluster the bipartite graph to gradually merge similar candidate nodes. It is reasonable to assume that if two candidates share many neighbors, it is likely that they refer to the same person. So we propose a similarity measure based on the bipartite graph, and use a bottom-up method to cluster the candidate nodes for person name disambiguation. The distance between two candidate nodes ci and cj is,

 dis(ci, cj ) 

(wik  wjk )2

(1)

sk Sn

According to this similarity measure, the normalized centroid

1233

method with dimension measures proposed in [5] is applied to clustering of the candidate nodes. The co-occurrence names in the million-scale webpages are high dimensional and sparse, which make the "curse of dimensionality" emerge as a great challenge. We use the dimension array data structure [5], to reduce clustering complexity effectively. Furthermore, we use the clusters as new candidate nodes to generate a new candidateneighbor bipartite graph to gradually cluster the candidate nodes until the result is stable.

3. EXPERIMENTS
The WePS-2 task dataset [1] is used in our experiment. The WePS-2 test set consists of 30 names, each of which has 150 pages. A similarity threshold for the clustering algorithm to control the granularity of clusters is determined experimentally. Since our objective is to correctly identify different namesakes, we use the WePS-1 dataset to train the similarity threshold by appointing a strict correctness condition. Then, we test the webpages clustering performance of the proposed method by using the B-Cubed measure to compare with the Top 3 systems reported in WePS-2. We also design a two-step clustering method based on [6] to incorporate the bipartite graph based method with textual features so the cluster result from our method is considered as a new document and then the textual features such as URL, token, title and bigram are used to compute the textural similarity among these documents.

Table 1. Clustering Results on WePS-2 Dataset

BEP

BER

F1

WePS2 Top 1

0.87

0.79

0.82

WePS2 Top 2

.0.85

0.80

0.81

WePS2 Top 3

0.93

0.73

0.81

Bipartite Graph

0.95

0.53

0.68

Two-Step

0.90

0.78

0.83

Table 1 shows that the bipartite graph based clustering method is

quite discriminative. The B-Cubed precision (BEP) of this method

is the highest among all the compared systems. The reason is that

the social circles differ a lot in different namesakes and the

bipartite graph based method can catch the differences of the

social networks. The two-step clustering method also shows high

precision as it uses the bipartite graph based method as its first

step. It gives the best F1 value because the use of textual features

obviously improves the recall for document clustering.

Figure 2. The F1 Performance of Namesakes identification. However, the B-Cubed measures are not designed for name entity disambiguation. When applied to namesakes being clustered, BEP does not penalize the same namesake being in separate clusters and BER does not penalize different namesakes being in the same cluster. So the criterion for namesakes clustering should be that a namesake is uniquely identified by a cluster. In other words, a

cluster can identify a specific person if and only if the webpages in this cluster belong to this person. So, the precision, recall and F1 on the clustering results to namesakes are examined. Figure 2 shows the evaluation on our two proposed methods through the evaluation on namesakes' identification. Contrary to the result in Table 1, the namesake F1 shows that the bipartite graph based method's average F1 is 0.563 with standard deviation of 0.094, whereas for the two-step clustering method, its average F1 is only 0.231 with standard deviation of 0.154. This means that the bipartite graph based method is better in its identification of unique namesakes as well as having less volatility. Since the testing data is a closed set, further investigation shows that some persons do not have social network information in these webpages. In these cases, the two-step clustering has better ability to use the additional textural feature to identify similarity of documents as indicated in Table 1 to get better clustering performance. However, the additional textual features also introduce noises, which indeed affects its ability to uniquely identify namesakes.
4. CONCLUSION
A new algorithm for person name disambiguation is proposed to use social network information to identify different namesakes. A bipartite graph based method is used to effectively splice the social networks in the high dimensional and sparse data. As a result, different namesakes are identified and the social network of each specific person is generated. Experimental results show that our proposed method is discriminative to identify the namesakes and has better performance than the top performers in WePS-2.
5. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The research is supported by NSF of China (60873097, 60933005), the National Grand Fundamental Research Program of China (2011CB302603), and the Human Language Tech Lab, Dept. of Computing, Hong Kong Polytechnic University.
6. REFERENCES
[1] Amigó, E., Artiles, J., Gonzalo, J., et al. WePS-3 Evaluation Campaign: Overview of the Online Reputation Management Task. In Proceedings of the 3rd Web People Search Evaluation Workshop (Padova,Italy, 2010).
[2] Han, X., Zhao, J. Named entity disambiguation by leveraging wikipedia semantic knowledge. Proceeding of the 18th ACM conference on Information and knowledge management (Jan 1 2009), 215-224.
[3] Malin, B. Unsupervised name disambiguation via social network similarity. SIAM SDM Workshop on Link Analysis, Counterterrorism and Security2005, 93­102.
[4] Yoshida, M., Ikeda, M., Ono, S. et al. Person name disambiguation by bootstrapping. Proceeding of the 33rd international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval(Jul 1 2010).
[5] Cao, H., Jiang, D., Pei, J. et al. Context-aware query suggestion by mining click-through and session data. Proceeding of the 14th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining(2008).
[6] M. Ikeda, S. Ono, I. Sato, M. et al. Person Name Disambiguation on the Web by Two-Stage Clustering. 2nd Web People Search Evaluation Workshop (WePS 2009).

1234

