Visualizing and Querying Semantic Social Networks
Aixin Sun, Anwitaman Datta, Ee-Peng Lim§, Kuiyu Chang
School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798 §School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore 178902
{axsun,awitaman,askychang}@ntu.edu.sg eplim@smu.edu.sg

ABSTRACT
We demonstrate SSNetViz that is developed for integrating, visualizing and querying heterogeneous semantic social networks obtained from multiple information sources. A semantic social network refers to a social network graph with multi-typed nodes and links. We demonstrate various innovative features of SSNetViz with social networks from three information sources covering a similar set of entities and relationships in terrorism domain.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.4 [Information Systems]: Information Storage and Retrieval-- Systems and Software
General Terms
Design
Keywords
Social network, Visualization, Integration, Search
1. INTRODUCTION
The increasing popularity of social network platforms has given opportunities to capture and understand the social structures among people and other types of entities on the Web. Nevertheless, the same users or entities may appear in different social networks where different sets of attributes and relationships are maintained. This calls for a tool to combine these social networks and conduct analysis on the combined network in a holistic manner.
SSNetViz offers a suite of functions to: (i) integrate multiple social networks through rule-based and manual matching approaches, (ii) visualize the integrated network with the ability of searching for a query relevant sub-network through entity name matching, free-text search of entity profiles, and path search, (iii) visualize the temporal evolution of the networks, and (iv) import/export the query relevant sub-network [2, 3]. The integration, free-text/path search and the sub-network import/export are the major features distinguishing our prototype from other similar systems [1, 4].
The main GUI of SSNetViz is shown in Figure 1. A query relevant sub-network can be defined based on the anchor nodes (i.e., entities) selected by users in Panel 1, or node search results from Panel 4. The sub-network may also be determined from path search results which include all the intermediate nodes formulating the
This work was supported by Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore, Project No. 062 101 0031.
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR'11, July 24­28, 2011, Beijing, China. ACM 978-1-4503-0757-4/11/07.

Figure 1: SSNetViz Main Graphical User Interface (GUI)
pathes between the source and target nodes. The sub-network visualized in Panel 3 is the integrated semantic social network where each node and link may be present in one or more individual social networks (i.e., sources). The network visualizer uses color codes to distinguish the source(s) where a node and link is recorded. The source tabs with matching colors in Panel 2 present the detailed information about a selected node in Panel 3, known as node profile. By clicking multiple source tabs, a user gets the information about the same entity from multiple sources. Not shown in Figure 1, the network visualizer offers slider tools for controlling the number of neighboring nodes of anchor nodes to be displayed in the screen as well as the timeline control for social networks with timestamps to visualize their evolution over time and delta differences. Another set of GUIs is provided to enable both rule and manual based network integration and network import/expert.
We will demonstrate how data can be integrated from multiple sources (using rule-based entity resolution as well as manually), and how a multi-dimensional network can be visualized, queried and manipulated. The demonstration will be loaded with three social networks in terrorism domain obtained from Terrorism Knowledge Base (TKB), Wikipedia, and a local research center.
2. REFERENCES
[1] J. Heer and D. Boyd. Vizster: Visualizing online social networks. In IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization, 2005.
[2] E.-P. Lim, A. T. Kwee, N. L. Ibrahim, A. Sun, A. Datta, K. Chang, and Maureen. Visualizing and exploring evolving information networks in wikipedia. In Proc. ICADL, pages 50­60, Gold Coast, 2010.
[3] E.-P. Lim, Maureen, N. L. Ibrahim, A. Sun, A. Datta, and K. Chang. Ssnetviz: a visualization engine for heterogeneous semantic social networks. In Proc. ICEC, pages 213­221, Taipei, 2009.
[4] Z. Shen, K.-L. Ma, and T. Eliassi-Rad. Visual analysis of large heterogeneous social networks by semantic and structural abstraction. IEEE Trans. on VCG, 12:1427­1439, 2006.

1271

