QuickView: Advanced Search of Tweets
Xiaohua Liu  , Long Jiang , Furu Wei , Ming Zhou , Microsoft QuickView Team 
School of Computer Science and Technology,Harbin Institute of Technology,Harbin,150001,China Microsoft Research Asia, No. 5, Dan Ling Street, Haidian District, Beijing, 100080, China
{xiaoliu, longj, fuwei, mingzhou, qview}@microsoft.com

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.1 [Content Analysis and Indexing]: Content Analysis and Indexing - indexing methods, linguistic processing; H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Information Search and Retrieval - information filtering, retrieval models
General Terms
Algorithms, Design, Experimentation
1. EXTENDED ABSTRACT
With tweets being a comprehensive repository for super fresh information, tweet search becomes increasingly popular. However, existing tweet search services, e.g., Twitter 1, offer only simple keyword based search. Owing to the noisy and informal nature of tweets, the returned list does not contain meaningful information in many cases.
This demonstration introduces QuickView, an advanced tweet search service to address this issue. It adopts a series of natural language processing technologies to extract useful information from a large volume of tweets. Specifically, for each tweet, it first conducts tweet normalization, followed by named entity recognition(NER). Our NER component is a combination of a k-nearest neighbors(KNN) classifier (to collect global information across recently labeled tweets) with a Conditional Random Fields (CRF) labeler (to exploit information from a single tweet and the gazetteers). Then it extracts opinions (e.g., positive or negative comments about a product). After that it conducts semantic role labeling(SRL) to get predicate-argument structures(e.g.,verbs and their agents or patients), which are further converted into events (i.e., triples of who did what). We follow Liu et al. [1] to construct our SRL component. Next, tweets are classified into predefined categories. Finally, non-noisy tweets together with the mined information are indexed.
On top of the index, QuickView enables the following two brand new scenarios, allowing users to effectively access their interested tweets or fine-grained information mined from tweets. Categorized Browsing. As illustrated in Figure 1(a), QuickView shows recent popular tweets, entities, events, opinions and so on, which are organized by categories. It also extracts and classifies URL links in tweets to allow users
1http://twitter.com/
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR'11, July 24­28, 2011, Beijing, China. ACM 978-1-4503-0757-4/11/07.

(a) A screenshot of the categorized browsing scenario.
(b) A screenshot of the advanced search scenario. Figure 1: Two scenarios of QuickView.
to check out popular links in a categorized way. Advanced Search. As shown in Figure 1(b), QuickView provides four advanced search functions: 1) search results are clustered so that tweets about the same/similar topic are grouped together, and for each cluster only the informative tweets are kept; 2) when the query is a person or a company name, two bars are presented followed by the words that strongly suggest opinion polarity. The bar's width is proportional to the number of associated opinions; 3) similarly, the top 6 most frequent words that most clearly express event occurrences are presented; 4) users can search tweets with opinions or events, e.g., search tweets containing any positive/negative opinion about Obama or any event involving Obama.
2. REFERENCES
[1] X. Liu, K. Li, B. Han, M. Zhou, L. Jiang, Z. Xiong, and C. Huang. Semantic role labeling for news tweets. In Coling, pages 698­706, 2010.

1275

