Personalized Video: Leanback online video consumption

Krishnan Ramanathan
HP Labs India Bangalore, India

Yogesh Sankarasubramaniam
HP Labs India Bangalore, India

Vidhya Govindaraju
HP Labs India Bangalore, India

krishnan_ramanathan@hp.com

yogesh@hp.com

vidhya.govindaraju@hp.com

ABSTRACT
Current user interfaces for online video consumption are mostly browser based, lean forward, require constant interaction and provide a fragmented view of the total content available. For easier consumption, the user interface and interactions need to be redesigned for less interruptive and lean back experience. In this paper, we describe Personalized Video, an application that converts the online video experience into a personalized lean back experience. It has been implemented on the Windows platform and integrated with intuitive user interactions like gesture and face recognition. It also supports group personalization for concurrent users.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.4.3 [Information Systems Applications]: Communication Applications
General Terms
Algorithms, Human Factors
Keywords
Personalization, group recommendation, similar content, ranking
1. INTRODUCTION
Current user interfaces for online video suffer from a number of limitations. The interfaces are usually browser based and are modeled after a search metaphor. Users have to constantly interact with the online video website (e.g. YouTube) after each video and decide what the next video they should watch. Multiple websites host a fraction of the total content available, so users have to visit different content provider websites. The interfaces are mostly geared for English language users and do not have enough support for non-English videos and users. Finally, most interfaces today are geared to single users and do not cater to the group consumption habits that TV has encouraged.
2. PERSONALIZED VIDEO
We have created a Windows application that solves the interface and experience limitations mentioned above. We describe some of the technical innovations below. Leanback online video consumption: The application aggregates videos from multiple online video providers using a topic based "channel" metaphor. A channel is any longstanding interest the user has. Videos are pushed into the channel without requiring users to make the same query again. Personalization: This is accomplished by video recommendation based on user profiles, and using user feedback to prioritize videos within a channel. The video recommender constructs a user profile by extracting keyphrases from the video metadata (title, tags, description), weighted based on user rating, number of views
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR'11, July 24­28, 2011, Beijing, China. ACM 978-1-4503-0757-4/11/07.

Figure 1. User interface elements (left) and technical innovations (right) in the Personalized Video application
etc. The recommender sources videos using this profile, and makes it available in the "Recommendations" channel. Within a channel, users are allowed to rate videos as "like" or "dislike". The video-keyphrase bipartite graph is then used to compute a rating on the unseen videos. The videos in the channel are then reprioritized based on this predicted rating. Similar content: Video keyphrases are also used to source similar videos and textual content. For e.g. a culinary video can point to the corresponding recipe, which the user can download or print. A user can also simply click on "Similar videos" to watch other videos related to the current one. Our solution works by first ranking the keyphrases, and then assessing the similarity of sourced content. Group consumption of videos: We have built a group recommender to source and display content that is of interest to all the viewers. First, users are identified by a face recognizer. Then, a joint user profile is constructed as follows: individual interests are first expanded into representative topics (keyphrases from video metadata), and then a reciprocal rule is used to combine/discard topics, which has the effect of jointly satisfying all the users. Videos are then sourced based on the joint profile, and presented to the current set of users. Thus, our approach allows a strong discovery of joint interests, rather than merely identify matches in the individual profiles. A study on subgroups of 30 users indicated that the retrieval precision is around 70%; users are also very satisfied with the quality of recommendations. Input methods: We have integrated the Gesture keyboard (developed at HP Labs India) that allows input in Indian language (e.g. Hindi). We have also implemented an application that allows a Symbian phone to be used for input at a distance (e.g. entering channel names). For video navigation, the application allows hand gesture navigation (in addition to touch). Users can provide feedback on the videos (like or dislike) with thumbs up/down gesture. We have also tested the user experience with the Logitech air mouse. Integration with Facebook and Twitter: Users can share a video with friends on Facebook and Twitter with customized messages.

1277

