GreenMeter: A Tool for Assessing the Quality and Recommending Tags for Web 2.0 Applications

Saulo Ricci, Dilson Guimarães, Fabiano Belém, Jussara M. Almeida, Marcos A. Gonçalves, Raquel Prates
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil
{saulomrr, dilsonag, fmuniz, jussara, mgoncalv, rprates}@dcc.ufmg.br

ABSTRACT
We present GreenMeter, a tool for assessing the quality and recommending tags for Web 2.0 content. Its goal is to improve tag quality and the effectiveness of various information services (e.g., search, content recommendation) that rely on tags as data sources. We demonstrate an implementation of GreenMeter for the popular Last.fm application.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.1 Information Storage and Retrieval: Content Analysis and Indexing
General Terms: Algorithms, Experimentation
Keywords: Tag Recommendation, Information Quality
1. SYSTEM OVERVIEW
The assignment of tags to describe and organize content is currently very popular on the Web 2.0. Indeed, being such content often multimedia, most current Information Retrieval (IR) services (e.g., searching, content recommendation) often rely on tags as one of the main data sources.
We here present GreenMeter, a tool for assessing tag quality and recommending tags for Web 2.0 objects. Tag quality is assessed from the perspective of supporting effective IR services, being thus related to how well the tag describes the object's content and/or discriminates it from other objects. We estimate tag quality by the combination of various heuristic metrics [1]. In particular, we use Term Spread (TS), which counts the number of textual features (e.g, title, description, comments, tags) associated with the object that contain a given candidate tag: the larger this number, the more related the tag is to the object's content and, thus, the higher its descriptive power (and its quality).
GreenMeter's tag recommendation method [1] extends existing tag co-occurrence based techniques [3] to include not only tags previously assigned to the objects (including the target of the recommendation), but also terms extracted from other textual features. It then applies the aforementioned heuristic metrics to rank candidate terms by their estimated quality, recommending the highly ranked terms. The proposed method greatly extends the state-of-the-art (e.g., [3, 2]) by combining tag co-occurrence and tag quality metrics, and by extracting candidates from multiple textual features. To perform such combination, we exploit
This work is supported by the INWeb (MCT/CNPq grant 57.3871/2008-6), and by the authors' grants from CNPq and FAPEMIG.
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR'11, July 24­28, 2011, Beijing, China. ACM 978-1-4503-0757-4/11/07.

Figure 1: Tag Cloud of "Miles Davis" on LastFM: original (left) and with GreenMeter (right).
both heuristic functions and machine learning techniques [1]. Moreover, GreenMeter's quality estimator is more sophisticated and realistic than simply favoring more popular tags, as performed by most applications, which can be easily target of malicious attacks (e.g., tag spamming).
We implemented GreenMeter in the LastFM online radio station. In LastFM, multiple users may assign the same tag to an object, as tags are mostly used for building personal collections. Figure 1(left) shows a snapshot of the LastFM tag cloud associated with the "Miles Davis" artist. Note that, like other applications, LastFM ranks tags by their popularity among users (more popular tags are shown in larger font sizes), and tends to recommend tags based on such metric. Figure 1(right) shows the use of GreenMeter on the same object. The color of each tag, in a red-to-green scale, represents its "quality": the greener, the higher its quality. The gauge indicates the quality of the tag cloud, computed as the average quality across all tags. The figure also shows the tags recommended by GreenMeter, "jazz", "funk", "psychedelic", "trumpet" and "fusion". In comparison with the tags recommended by LastFM (i.e., "jazz", "trumpet", "fusion", "bebop", and "blues"), such tags seem to better describe one of the Jazz Fusion's style precursors.
GreenMeter has two components. The back-end includes a data crawler, the tag quality estimator, and the tag recommender. The front-end, responsible for presentation, is built on top of the Greasemonkey Firefox add-on1.
2. REFERENCES
[1] F. Bel´em et al. Associative Tag Recommendation Exploiting Multiple Textual Features. In SIGIR, 2011.
[2] G. Menezes et al. Demand-Driven Tag Recommendation. In PKDD, 2010.
[3] B. Sigurbj¨ornsson and R. Zwol. Flickr Tag Recommendation based on Collective Knowledge. In WWW, 2008.
1More information on GreenMeter can be found at http://sites.google.com/site/greenmeterdemo/

1279

