Machine Learning for Information Retrieval

Luo Si
Department of Computer Science Purdue University lsi@cs.purdue.edu

Rong Jin
Department of Computer Science and Engineering Michigan State University rongjin@cse.msu.edu

ABSTRACT
In recent years, we have witnessed successful application of machine learning techniques to a wide range of information retrieval problems, including Web search engines, recommendation systems, online advertising, etc. It is thus critical for researchers in the information retrieval community to understand the core machine learning techniques. In order to accommodate audiences with different levels of understanding of machine learning, we divide this tutorial into two sessions: the first session will focus on basic machine learning concepts and tools; in the second session, we will introduce more advanced topics in machine learning, and will present recent developments in machine learning and its application to information retrieval. Each season is self-contained.
Session 1: Core Learning Technologies for Information Retrieval. This session of the tutorial will cover the core machine learning methods, basic optimization techniques and key information retrieval applications. In particular, it includes: 1). Core concepts in machine learning, such as supervised learning/unsupervised learning, bias and variance trade off, and probabilistic models; 2). Useful concepts and algorithms in optimization including the first and second order gradient methods, and Expectation and Maximization; 3). The application of machine learning methods to key information retrieval problems including text classification, collaborative filtering, clustering and learning to rank;
Session 2: Emerging Learning Technologies for Information Retrieval. This session will cover more advanced machine learning techniques that have started to be utilized in information retrieval applications. In particular, it will cover: 1). Advanced Optimization Techniques including stochastic optimization and smooth minimization; 2). Emerging Learning Techniques such as Multiple-Instance Learning, Active Learning and Semi-supervised Learning.
The tutorial will benefit a large body of audience in the information retrieval community, ranging from students who are new to machine learning to the seasoned researchers who would like to understand the recent advance in machine learning for information retrieval research. This tutorial will also benefit the

practitioners who apply learning techniques to real-world information retrieval systems.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Clustering, Information filtering, Retrieval models; I.2.6 [Artificial Intelligence]: Learning; I.5.2 [Pattern Recognition] Design Methodology; Classifier design and evaluation; G.1.6 [Optimization] Convex programming, gradient methods; G.3 [Probability and Statistics] Probabilistic algorithms

General Terms
Algorithms, Performance, Design, Experimentation, Theory.

Keywords
Information Retrieval Application,
Probabilistic Methods, Optimization

Machine

Learning,

Bios
Si Bio: Dr. Si is an Assistant professor at Computer Science Department and Statistic Department (by courtesy) at Purdue University. Dr. Si's research interests include information retrieval, machine learning techniques and applications, and text mining techniques. Dr. Si is an associate editor of ACM Transactions on Information System and an editorial board member of Information Processing and Management. Dr. Si got NSF Career Award in 2008. Dr. Si got his Ph.D. degree from Carnegie Mellon University in 2006. Dr. Si has collaborated with industry companies such as Yahoo! and Google.

Jin Bio: Dr. Jin is an Associate professor of the Computer and Science Engineering Dept. of Michigan State University. He has been working in the areas of statistical machine learning and its application to information retrieval. Dr. Jin has extensive research experience in a variety of machine learning algorithms such as conditional exponential models, support vector machine, boosting and optimization for different applications including information retrieval. Dr. Jin is an associate editor of ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data. Dr. Jin got NSF Career Award in 2006. Dr. Jin got his Ph.D. degree from Carnegie Mellon University in 2003. Dr. Jin has collaborated with industry companies such as Yahoo!, Intel and NEC.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR'11, July 24­28, 2011, Beijing, China. ACM 978-1-4503-0757-4/11/07.

1293

