Web Retrieval: The Role of Users

Ricardo Baeza-Yates
Yahoo! Research, Barcelona, Spain
rbaeza@acm.org
ABSTRACT
Web retrieval methods have evolved through three major steps in the last decade or so. They started from standard documentcentric IR in the early days of the Web, then made a major step forward by leveraging the structure of the Web, using link analysis techniques in both crawling and ranking challenges. A more recent, no less important but maybe more discrete step forward, has been to enter the user in this equation in two ways: (1) Implicitly, through the analysis of usage data captured by query logs, and session and click information in general; the goal here being to improve ranking as well as to measure user's happiness and engagement; (2) Explicitly, by offering novel interactive features; the goal here being to better answer users' needs. This half day tutorial covers the user-related challenges associated with the implicit and explicit role of users in Web retrieval. More specifically, we review and discuss challenges associated with:
 Usage data analysis and metrics - It is critical to monitor how users take advantage and interact with Web retrieval systems, as this implicit relevant feedback aggregated at a large scale, can provide insights on users' underlying intent as well as approximate quite accurately the level of success of a given feature. Here we have to consider not only clicks statistics, the sequences of queries, the time spent in a page, the number of actions per session, etc. This is the focus of the first part of the tutorial.
 User interaction - Given the intrinsic problems posed by the Web, the key challenge for the user is to conceive a good query to be submitted to the search system, one that leads to a manageable and relevant answer. The retrieval system must assist users during two key stages of interaction: efore the query is fully expressed and after the results are returned. After quite some stagnation on the front-end of Web retrieval, we have seen numerous novel interactive features appear in the last 3 to 4 years, as the leading commercial search engines seem to compete for users' attention. The second part of the tutorial will be dedicated to explicit user interaction. We will introduce novel material (as compared to previous versions of this tutorial that were given at SIGIR'2010, WSDM'2011 and ECIR'2011) in order to reflect recent Web search features such as Google Instant or Yahoo! Direct Search.
The goal of this tutorial is to teach the key principles and technologies behind the activities and challenges briefly outlined above, bring new understanding and insights to the attendees, and hopefully foster future research. A previous version of this tutorial was offered at the ACM SIGIR'2010, WSDM'2011 and ECIR'2011.

Yoelle Maarek
Yahoo! Research, Haifa, Israel
yoelle@ymail.com
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]
General Terms
Algorithms, Human Factors
Keywords
Web Retrieval, User Interaction
BIOGRAPHIES OF PRESENTERS
Ricardo Baeza-Yates is VP of Yahoo! Research for Europe and Latin America. Until 2005, he was the director of the Center for Web Research at the Department of Computer Science of the Engineering School of the University of Chile, and ICREA Professor at the Dept. of Technology of University Pompeu Fabra in Barcelona, Spain. He is co-author of the book Modern Information Retrieval, whose 2nd edition appeared in 2011, as well as co-author of the 2nd edition of the Handbook of Algorithms and Data Structures, Addison- Wesley, 1991; and co-editor of Information Retrieval: Algorithms and Data Structures, Prentice-Hall, 1992, among more than 200 other publications. He has been PC Chair of the most important conferences in the field of Web Search and Web Mining. Most recently, he was one of the co-chairs WWW'2010 Web Search Track and PC co-chair of SIGIR'2011. He has received the organization of American States award for young researchers in exact sciences (1993) and with two Brazilian research articles (1997). In 2003 he was the first computer scientist to be elected to the Chilean Academy of Sciences. During 2007, he was awarded the Graham Medal for innovation in computing, given by the University of Waterloo to distinguished ex-alumni and in 2009 was named ACM Fellow. Yoelle Maarek is a Senior Research Director at Yahoo! Labs and heads Yahoo! Research in Israel since 2009. Prior to this, Yoelle was the Director of Google Haifa Engineering Center, which she opened in 2006. There, she led the development of "Google Suggest", a query completion feature deployed on google.com and YouTube worldwide. Before this, Yoelle had been with IBM Research, first in the US, and then in Israel, where she led the search and collaboration department and became a Distinguished Engineer. She graduated from the ENPC in Paris, France, and received her DEA in CS from Paris VI University. Yoelle obtained her PhD in Computer Science from Technion, Israel Institute of Technology. Yoelle has published extensively in the Web and IR communities. Most recently, she has served as Program co-chair of WWW'2009, as senior PC member at several SIGIR and WWW conferences. She is also Program cochair for WSDM'2012 and SIGIR'2012. Yoelle is a member of the Board of Governors of Technion, and was appointed ACM Distinguished Scientist in 2010.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR'11, July 24-28, 2011, Beijing, China. ACM 978- 1-4503-0757-4/11/07.

1303

