Domain-Specific Information Retrieval Using Recommenders
Wei Li
Centre for Next Generation Localization School of Computing, Dublin City University
Dublin 9, Ireland
wli@computing.dcu.ie

ABSTRACT
The continuing increase in the volume of information available in our daily lives is creating ever greater challenges for people to find personally useful information. One approach used to addressing this problem is Personalized Information Retrieval (PIR). PIR systems collect a user's personal information from both implicit and explicit sources to build a user profile with the objective of giving retrieval results which better meet their individual user information needs than a standard Information Retrieval (IR) system. However, in many situations there may be no opportunity to learn about the specific interests of a user and build a personal model when this user is querying on a new topic, e.g. when a user visits a museum or exhibition which is unrelated to their normal search interests. Under this condition, the experiences and behaviours of other previous users, who have made similar queries, could be used to build a model of user behavior in this domain. My PhD proposes to focus on the development of new and innovative methods of domain-specific IR. My work seeks to combine recommender algorithms trained using previous search behaviours from different searchers with a standard ranked IR method to form a domain-specific IR model to improve the search effectiveness for a user entering a query without personal prior search history on this topic. The challenges for my work are: how to provide users better results; how to train and evaluate the methods proposed in my work.
Since there are no suitable data collections available to enable us to explore this proposal, simulation plays a key role in our research. We have conducted an initial experiment study incorporating a very simple simulation method. The details are as follows:  The INEX 2009 Wikipedia document collection [2] was
used, with 20 topics from INEX 2009 topic dataset for which relevance assessments were avaiable;  !0 variants of each topic were made by randomly deleting one or two from the original topic;  An extended SMART retrieval system [3] was used with each topic variant to the rank top 20 documents ;  A user grating for each retrieval document was generated using the topic relevance assessment: 1 for relevant documents and 0 for other documents;  Retrieved document rating values used to train a recommender for each topic using the weighted slope-one collaborative algorithm [1];  The original topic statement was used as a test topic to retrieve a ranked list using extended SMART system. The retrieved documents were used to select the most similar recommender.
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR'11, July 24­28, 2011, Beijing, China. ACM 978-1-4503-0757-4/11/07.

 The information in this recommender was used to predict ratings for retrieved documents;

 For each document j , a final ranking weight FWj was

calculated by linearly combining its score in initial ranked

list from extended SMART system RWj and its rating in

the prediction list from recommender algorithm RWj ,

where  in equation (1) is a scalar constant determining the

contribution of each component.

FW j    PW j  (1  )  RW j

(1)

The results of ranking retrieved results for each original topic

using the extended SMART system are used as our baseline.

The MAP increases from 0.0744 to 0.1178 (+58%). This initial

experiment demonstrates the potential for utilizing recommender

algorithms in IR. My current work is focusing on developing

more realistic simulation models for the training environment,

exploring the use of relevance feedback in combination with

recommenders, automatically identifying topical domain of

topics and automatically clustering topics for training

recommenders, exploring the development of more suitable

evaluation metrics, and exploiting other recommender

algorithms to make this approach more effective.

Categories and Subject Descriptors

H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Information Search and Retrieval, Information Filtering

General Terms

Recommender Algorithm, Simulation, Experimentation

Keywords

Domain-Specific IR, Recommender

1. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research is supported by the Science Foundation Ireland (Grant 07/CE/I1142) as part of the Centre for Next Generation
Localisation (CNGL) project.

2. REFERENCES
[1] Lemire, D. and Maclachlan, A. Slope One Predictors for Online
Rating-Based Collaborative Filtering. In Proceedings of SIAM Data Mining (SDM), 2005
[2] Geva, S., Kamps, J., Lethonen, M. Schenkel, R., Thom, J.A., and
Trotman, A. Overview of the INEX 2009 Ad Hoc Track, In Proceedings of INEX'2009
[3] Debasis Ganguly, Implementing Language Modeling in SMART,
Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta, India,July 2008

1327

