Using k-top Retrieved Web Snippets to Date Temporal Implicit Queries based on Web Content Analysis

Ricardo Nuno Taborda Campos

LIAAD ­ INESC Porto, LA, University of Porto, Portugal

Polytechnic Institute of Tomar, Portugal

ricardo.campos@ipt.pt

ABSTRACT
Temporal Information Retrieval (T-IR) has been a topic of great interest in recent years. Its purpose is to improve the information retrieval of documents by exploiting temporal information. However and despite the relative maturity of the area and an increasing involvement of the IR community in recent years, few works have fully used temporal information for exploration and search purposes [1], causing many queries not to be inferred by search engines. Such a lack lies in the fact that the used retrieval models continue to represent documents and queries simplistically, ignoring the underlying temporal semantics. Inferring the user intentions and the period he has in mind, may therefore play an extremely important role in the retrieval of the results. Our work goes in this direction.
We aim at introducing a temporal analysis framework for analyzing documents in a temporal dimension in order to identify and understand the temporal nature of any given query, namely implicit ones (e.g., SIGIR). Our analysis is not based on metadata, but on the exploitation of temporal information from the content itself. As referred by [2] this is an interesting future research direction, for which, there isn't still a clear solution. Specifically we aim at looking for temporal information within web snippets. In order to validate this approach we have already studied how large the temporal value of web snippets is related to the user's query. This preliminary research [3] showed us that web snippets, are interesting pieces of concentrated information, where time clues, especially years, often appear. Our intention is to develop a language-independent solution and to model the degree of

vectors, a conceptual and a temporal one. Our next step is to model, somehow, the relations between encountered time stamps and terms in the web snippets. This will allow an improvement in the similarity between two documents. Given this representation we can then disambiguate the query in terms of concept and time by computing the similarity value between each of the snippets. We propose to do this by clustering the k top snippets retrieved from the execution of any given query. Based on the new representation of the web snippets and on the query issued, the system should be able to provide a temporal classification on the assumption that only clear concept queries (non-ambiguous in concept) can be valued in terms of temporal intent. Determining whether a query is temporal or not can thus be seen as a classification problem which categorizes any conceptually unambiguous query into one of three temporal categories introduced by [4]: 1. ATemporal, i.e. not sensitive to time (e.g., make my trip); 2. Temporal Unambiguous i.e. taking place at a specific period in time (e.g., bp oil spill); 3. Temporal Ambiguous i.e. with multiple instances over time (e.g., oil spill). We have already performed an experiment [3] over 176 clear concept queries individually analyzed upon real data observation. We conclude, contrary to the 7% presented by [5], that 25% of the queries have an implicit temporal nature. Predicting this temporal classification will then lead us to automatically customize the results and employ different visualization or query expansion solutions for the different kinds of queries: 1. list of documents; 2. timelines; 3. temporal or/and topic clusters; 4. query expansion.
Categories and Subject Descriptors

relationship between the terms and dates identified. This is the core part of the framework and the basis for both temporal query understanding and search results exploration, such as temporal clustering. One of the challenges of our system, however, is how

H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search and Retrieval ­ Query Formulation, Search Process, Clustering
General Terms

to deal with conceptually ambiguous queries, such as Madagascar (the country or the movie) or Scorpions (the rock band, the arachnid or the zodiac sign) which can have a different temporal dimension in each different meaning. We believe that inferring this knowledge is a very important step in the process of adding a

Algorithms.
Keywords
Temporal Information Retrieval, Implicit Temporal Queries.
1. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

temporal dimension to IR systems, thus disambiguating a large class of queries for which search engines continue to fail.

This research is supervised by Gaël Dias and Alípio Jorge, and is partially funded by a Portuguese grant (SFRH/BD/63646/2009).

Motivated by this, we aim to contribute with 1) a model that takes into account both content importance and temporal distance within web snippets capable of understanding the query users' intents in order to identify not only relevant documents but also relevant time periods; 2) develop a classification system to classify a query both in the conceptual and temporal perspectives; 3) determine the most appropriate visualization interface: timelines, clusters or user-features, such as query expansion.
So far we have developed a rule-based model solution to automatically extract temporal information, namely dates expressed by numerical formats in the interval [1000..2099]. We have also formulated web snippet modeling by means of two

2. REFERENCES
[1] Alonso, O., Gertz, M., & Baeza-Yates, R. (2009). Clustering and Exploring Search Results using Timeline Constructions. In CIKM.
[2] Berberich, K., Bedathur, S., Alonso, O., & Weikum, G. (2010). A Language Modeling Approach for Temporal Information Needs. In LNCS (Vol. 5993/2010, pp. 13 - 25).
[3] Campos, R., Dias, G., & Jorge, A. M. (2011). What is the Temporal Value of Web Snippets? In TWAW2011 associated to WWW2011.
[4] Jones, R., & Diaz, F. (2007). Temporal Profiles of Queries. In TOIS: ACM Transactions on Information Systems , 25(3).
[5] Metzler, D., Jones, R., Peng, F., & Zhang, R. (2009). Improving Search Relevance for Implicitly Temporal Queries. In SIGIR 2009.

1325

