A Large Scale Machine Learning System for

Recommending Heterogeneous Content in Social

Networks

Yanxin Shi
Facebook Inc. 1601 S. California Ave Palo Alto, CA 94304
1-650-714-2189

David Ye
Facebook Inc. 1601 S. California Ave Palo Alto, CA 94304
1-650-714-2189

Andrey Goder
Facebook Inc. 1601 S. California Ave Palo Alto, CA 94304
1-650-714-2189

yanxin@fb.com

dye@fb.com

agoder@fb.com

Srinivas Narayanan
Facebook Inc. 1601 S. California Ave Palo Alto, CA 94304
1-650-714-2189
srinivas@fb.com

ABSTRACT
The goal of the Facebook recommendation engine is to compare and rank heterogeneous types of content in order to find the most relevant recommendations based on user preference and page context. The challenges for such a recommendation engine include several aspects: 1) the online queries being processed are at very large scale; 2) with new content types and new usergenerated content constantly added to the system, the candidate object set and underlying data distribution change rapidly; 3) different types of content usually have very distinct characteristics, which makes generic feature engineering difficult; and 4) unlike a search engine that can capture intention of users based on their search queries, our recommendation engine needs to focus more on users' profile and interests, past behaviors and current actions in order to infer their cognitive states. In this presentation, we would like to introduce an effective, scalable, online machine learning framework we developed in order to address the aforementioned challenges. We also want to discuss the insights, approaches and experiences we have accumulated during our research and development process.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information storage and retrieval]: Information search and retrieval­ relevance feedback, retrieval models.
General Terms
Algorithms, Performance.
Keywords
CTR prediction, Large scale system, Online learning
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR'11, July 24­28, 2011, Beijing, China. ACM 978-1-4503-0757-4/11/07.

With over 500 million active users, Facebook is the world largest social network giving people the power to connect with their friends and share their daily experiences. User growth and engagement are always important goals for Facebook. In line with these goals, the right hand column of Facebook page views is used for personalized recommendation of heterogeneous types of content, such as people you may know, pages you may like, friends' photos, and interesting articles from partner websites. Currently, there are nearly 100 different content types, and this number is still increasing.
The goal of the Facebook recommendation engine is to compare and rank these heterogeneous types of content in order to find the most relevant recommendations based on user preference and page context. There are four major challenges for such a recommendation engine. First, the online queries being processed are at very large scale. To illustrate, for each of the tens of billions of daily page views on Facebook, a query containing user information and page context is generated and sent to the engine, which will select the most relevant recommendations out of billions of indexed candidate objects (e.g., pages, photos, people, ads, etc.) within milliseconds. Second, with new content types and new user-generated content constantly added to the system, the candidate object set and underlying data distribution change rapidly. This makes the timeliness of model learning and updating very important. Third, different types of content usually have very distinct characteristics, which makes generic feature engineering difficult. In other words, an important feature for one content type might not be useful for another. For example, user-user interaction features can help achieve good people suggestions but not page suggestions. Finally, it is also fairly challenging to effectively model and retrieve a user's cognitive states in real time from multiple data sources, such as user profile and user behaviors. Unlike a search engine that can capture intention of users based on their search queries, our recommendation engine needs to focus more on users' profile and interests, past behaviors and current actions in order to infer their desires.

1337

To solve the aforementioned challenges, we have devised and developed an effective, scalable, online machine learning framework. Using a generalized linear model which can contain millions of sparse features, this framework is able to process online queries at very large scale. For model learning and updating, it utilizes the user's behavior in real time as learning examples, and updates the production model in minutes to reflect any underlying data distribution change. This framework also enables us to easily add per content type sparse features such that we can effectively model different characteristics of various types of content. To understand a user's current cognitive state, we use a hierarchical model to predict the concepts of hundreds of millions of diverse and enriched user-generated content (such as status updates, likes, comments, etc). These predicted concepts are 1) fed into our machine learning model as features, and 2) used to retrieve recommendations closely related to a user action in real time (e.g., a "winter sports" page recommendation will be

refreshed in immediately after a user posts "I like skiing", because winter sports matches the concept of skiing).
In summary, unlike traditional document search, the problem we face at Facebook is to consider user information and page context as query to retrieve the most relevant recommendations from heterogeneous types of content with distinct characteristics. How to effectively compare and rank these different types of content in order to optimize user experience raises several fairly challenging yet interesting questions, especially with the scale of the data and queries we are operating at. We address these questions by using modern machine learning and information retrieval technologies that are either developed in house or improved from existing literature. In our presentation, we would like to discuss and share the insights, approaches and experiences we have accumulated during our research and development process.

1338

