Sensor-Aided Mobile Information Management and Retrieval

Edward Y. Chang
Google Research edchang@google.com

ABSTRACT
The number of "smart" mobile devices such as wireless phones and tablet computers has been rapidly growing. These mobile devices are equipped with a variety of sensors such as camera, gyroscope, accelerometer, compass, NFC, WiFi, GPS, etc. These sensors can be used to capture images and voice, detect motion patterns, and predict locations, to name just a few. This keynote depicts techniques in configuration, calibration, computation, and fusion for improving sensor performance and conserving power consumption. We also present novel mobile information management and retrieval applications that can benefit a great deal from enhanced sensor technologies.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.2.8 [Database Management]: Database applications ­ Spatial databases and GIS.
General Terms
Algorithms, Performance, Design, Experimentation, Theory.
Keywords
Inertial navigation system, location, mobile, sensor.
1. OVERVIEW
This keynote presents a signal-fusion architecture XINS, where X stands for a signal source that can calibrate a moving device's location as an external reference, and INS stands for inertial navigation system. An X can be GPS, WiFi, or location information of a nearby device transmitted over a P2P protocol. An INS can be, but is not limited to, an accelerometer, a gyroscope, and a magnetic sensor. Modern phones like Google Nexus S and iPhone are equipped with tiny and energy-efficient INS'. The design goals of XINS are (1) to fuse signals from Xs and INS' to predict the location of a moving device, and (2) to achieve so in a power-conserving way.
System architectures similar to XINS have been developed before, but with vastly different constraints and at much higher costs. For instance, aircrafts, guided missiles and submarines have been designed to compute positions and velocities using external references and inertial navigation systems. A mobile phone, though, while equipped with similar motion-sensing devices, cannot compute positions and velocities as accurately as the former due to several factors. Some factors include low manufacturing quality originating from cost constraints,

environmental noise, and the dynamic motions of people carrying the devices (as opposed to an aircraft for example). Moreover, the power usage of acquiring X signals on a mobile phone is much higher as a percentage of total energy consumed compared to that used on e.g., a submarine. These factors make the design of XINS exceedingly challenging.
Inexpensive inertial navigation systems are notorious for producing errors due to misalignment, zero bias, and integration drift. A slightly inaccurate reading on linear acceleration (accelerometers) and angular velocity (gyroscopes) can be integrated into progressively (in time) large errors in velocity, which are compounded into greater errors in position. Worse yet, the motion of a mobile device is often "non-smooth" compared to an aircraft. For instance, different people can carry a mobile device at different time and in different manners. It is virtually impossible to tell true signals from noise. To eliminate noise, we have devised calibration schemes, and breakthrough signal processing algorithms using Equipartition theorem [1]. We further demonstrate that by using selected signals as primary sources and the others as constraints, signal fusion [2] can be performed both effectively and efficiently.
We enumerate applications that can benefit a great deal from XINS. Three examples are as follows:
1. XINS can predict indoor locations of mobile devices where GPS signal may be unavailable. 2. XINS can achieve location prediction in a power-conserving way by reducing sampling rates of primary signals and filling the gaps with power-conserving signals. 3. XINS can track the angle and the movement of a camera with high accuracy to enable smart image processing applications such as panoramas.
2. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
My thanks to Google collaborators Qingxuan Yang, Yuan Gao, Guanfeng Li, and Chengu Wang, and Hang Qu.
3. REFERENCES
[1] XINS: The Anatomy of an Indoor Positioning and Navigation
Architecture, Yuan Gao, Qingxuan Yang, Guanfeng Li, Edward Y. Chang, Dong Wang, Chengu Wang, Hang Qu, Pei Dong, Faen Zhang, Google Technical Report, April 2011
[2] Foundations of Large-Scale Multimedia Information Management and
Retrieval, Mathematics of Perception, Edward Y. Chang, Springer, 2011

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR'11, July 24­28, 2011, Beijing, China. ACM 978-1-4503-0757-4/11/07.

1333

