User Behavior in Zero-Recall eCommerce Queries
Gyanit Singh1, Nish Parikh1 and Neel Sundaresan1
1eBay Research Labs, 2065 Hamilton Ave, San Jose, CA, USA
1{gysingh, nparikh, nsundaresan}@ebay.com

ABSTRACT
User expectation and experience for web search and eCommerce (product) search are quite different. Product descriptions are concise as compared to typical web documents. User expectation is more specific to find the right product. The difference in the publisher and searcher vocabulary (in case of product search the seller and the buyer vocabulary) combined with the fact that there are fewer products to search over than web documents result in observable numbers of searches that return no results (zero recall searches). In this paper we describe a study of zero recall searches. Our study is focused on eCommerce search and uses data from a leading eCommerce site's user click stream logs. There are 3 main contributions of our study: 1) The cause of zero recall searches; 2) A study of user's reaction and recovery from zero recall; 3) A study of differences in behavior of power users versus novice users to zero recall searches.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search and Retrieval--search process, query formulation
General Terms
Experimentation, Human Factors, Measurement
Keywords
Zero recall, e-Commerce search, User studies
1. INTRODUCTION
The challenges faced by typical search engines are different from those faced by eCommerce search engines. Product descriptions are shorter and less redundant and less abundant as compared to other web documents. Further, transience of the content (as items or products sell out they may not be available for search) and the difference in the vocabulary between the sellers or retailers and potential buyers can result in zero recall. Consider the following example: A seller
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. SIGIR'11, July 24­28, 2011, Beijing, China. Copyright 2011 ACM 978-1-4503-0757-4/11/07 ...$10.00.

selling a travel power adapter that works world-wide may describe it as a "Universal Travel Adapter ". A buyer traveling to Europe and looking to buy a travel adapter might search for "Travel Adapter for Europe". More specifically, recently the query "Oblong Shipping Boxes" on eBay returned no results. The query "Vintage Silvertone Frog Bracelet" on Amazon and the query "Wooden carom board " on craigslist returned no results. For online businesses when a buyer sees no result it causes buyer frustration and implies potential loss of revenue. Novice users may walk away from such situations while experienced or persistent users might try variations on the queries to get what they came looking for. Table 1 shows the trail of a user looking for a "boiler condensate disposal unit". Differences in buyer and seller vocabulary led to zero recall searches for this user. User had to go through 2 zero recall searches and various modifications of her original query to get to an item of interest. For example in the first search "boiler neutralization unit" the searcher used the wrong keyword to describe the unit, i.e. neutralization and not trap.

Table 1: Example trail from logs where the user

was looking for "Boiler condensate disposal unit".

The time flows from top to bottom. Difference in

buyer and seller vocabulary resulted in 2 zero re-

call searches. The tenacious buyer reformulated her

query 3 times before she found the product she was

interested in. Action

Query/Title

Recall

Homepage

-

-

Search

boiler neutralization unit 0

Search

neutralization unit

0

Search

condensate

370

Search

condensate trap

32

View

Evaporator coil condensate drain trap

-

If we were to mine the intelligence buried in such trails, assistive tools can be provided that direct novice users to a path of potential purchase.
In this paper we focus our discussion on the analysis of user click stream data for a large sample of users for zero recall queries. The data is obtained from user click-stream logs of a leading eCommerce site. We focus on the following research questions and attempt to provide answers for these.
1. How do users get to a zero recall situation?

75

2. How do they react, and how this impacts their path to success?
3. How do power users differ from novice users in such situations?
Rest of the paper is organized as follows. Related work is described in Section 2. In Section 3 we describe the dataset used for our study and we also define the terminology used in the rest of the paper. In Section 4 we discuss first order analysis, linguistic characteristics and temporal volatility of zero recall queries. In Section 5 we study major mechanisms for the cause of zero recall searches. We show how different users (Power users vs. Novices) react to and recover from zero recall searches. In Section 6 we summarize our key contributions and indicate plans for future work.
2. RELATED WORK
User behavior in web search has been well studied. In [6], Granka et al. use eye-tracking to investigate how users interact with the results page of a WWW search engine. They describe the amount of time users spend viewing the abstracts, the amount of abstracts they view as well as measures of how thoroughly searchers evaluate their results set. Recently in [18] White and Huang presented a log-based study estimating the value of search trails to users. In [2], Baeza-Yates et al. model user's search behavior using query log data.
User variability in search has also been extensively studied. In [3] Bhavnani describes a study in which healthcare and online shopping experts were observed when they performed search tasks within and outside their domain of expertise. The study showed that non-domain experts could benefit from Search Strategy portals that provide domain specific knowledge to help with searching in unfamiliar domains. In [10] Lazonder et al. describe a study conducted on 25 Dutch students. The results showed that subjects with WWW-experience were more proficient in locating web-sites than novice WWW-users. In [8] H¨olscher and Strube highlight the variability in the web search behavior of Internet experts and newbies. In a recent study [9] Kang and Fu conducted an experiment comparing search behavior of experts and novices when they searched using a traditional search engine and a social tagging system. Results from the experiment showed that experts relied more on their own domain knowledge to generate search queries while novices were influenced more by social cues in the social tagging system.
Large-scale studies based on looking at trails in logs have also been conducted to investigate the differences in behaviors of users in different search situations. In [16] White and Drucker find that there are dramatic differences in variability in key aspects of the interaction within and between users, and within and between the search queries they submit. Most research has suggested that domain experts search differently than people with little or no domain knowledge. Domain experts employ different search strategies and are more successful in finding what they are looking for than non-experts. In [17], White et al. present a large-scale, longitudinal, log-based analysis of the effect of domain expertise on web search behavior in four different domains (medicine, finance, law and computer science). They characterize the nature of the queries, search sessions, web sites visited, and search success for users identified as experts and non-experts

within those domains. They also show how domain expertise can be used to help non-experts gain expertise.
User behavior can also be used to enhance search features. In [14] Singla et al. demonstrate value in user trails, highlight interesting differences in the performance of trailfinding algorithms and show how to find best trails for a query that can outperform the trails that most users follow. In [1] Agichtein et al. show how web search ranking can be improved by incorporating user behavior information.
In [4] Blair and Maron describe detailed evaluation of a full text document retrieval system. They show how the system does not perform satisfactorily and suffers from problems related to poor recall. Zero recall queries have also been described in literature. In [13] Pera describes how a shortcoming of existing library systems is the generation of a large percentage of zero-hits, i.e. no library records are retrieved for the corresponding library patron's queries. In [11] Parikh and Sundaresan describe how product searches can often return null results due to buyer-seller vocabulary mismatch or over-specialization of queries. They propose the use of a Semantic Query Network to help the users reformulate their query or to recommend queries which are likely to return inventory and are related to the user's intent. In [5] Broder et al. describe rare queries. They mention that rare web query sets contain 8-15% of queries which lead to zero recall.
Although user behavior in search has been studied in various domains, to the best of our knowledge not many large scale studies have been done for eCommerce search. Also, not much work has been done around understanding user reaction to zero recall queries. Our work focuses on bridging this gap.
3. DATASET
For our study we used click-stream logs from eBay. The dynamic nature of inventory poses unique challenges for search in a marketplace like eBay. Search on eBay is predominantly boolean. Based on partially typed queries, query completions are shown in the auto-complete dropdown box. Other searches related to the user typed-in query are shown below the search box as "Related Searches". As query suggestion features use algorithms based on mining query logs, for a minority of tail traffic, the algorithm [7] may be unable to compute and display suggestions. In case of zero recall, an option to retry the search with fewer keywords is shown at the bottom of the interface. The search interface offers the users features to constrain the product results and navigate to the inventory of interest. If product matches are found across multiple categories in the taxonomy tree, the matching categories are displayed on the left side of the interface for narrowing the search. Both navigation filters and query suggestions are displayed at the onset of the interaction. The interface also provides an option to the users to further constrain their search based on price range, condition of item (new or used), reputation of seller and format of item (fixed price or auction). The user has the option to sort the matching product set based on different factors like expiry time, price or BestMatch (eBay's multi-factor ranking, which is the default). By default products are displayed in a list view. Users can optionally select a grid view. In list view a short product title, thumbnail image and other meta-data like price, shipping charges and expiry time are

76

displayed. We used a large sample from click-stream logs gathered over a 12 month period.
3.1 Terminology
Query: User typed in terms which are used as input to look up matching items in a product inventory.
Search: Using query and other constraints namely price, item condition specifics, shipping information, color and categorical constraints (for example Electronics) to find matching inventory.
Recall of query: Number of items matched to that query. Zero recall search (ZRS): Searches which return no matching items. Non-zero recall search (NZRS): Searches which return at least one matching item.
3.2 Logs
The data used for our study comprises of 16 million unique users performing 2.2 billion searches. The dataset comprises of 140 million search trails. We compute cumulative price for all the historical purchase activity of the user with in last 365 days. We classify users as novice users and power users based upon the money they spend on the site. Users who spend more than a predefined threshold (1) are considered power users and those that spend less than a predefined threshold (2) are considered novice users. Threshold used for definition for power users is magnitude of order greater than the threshold used for definition of novice users ( 1 2 ).
All pages visited and all interactions on the site are logged in click-stream logs. We assigned each page visit and user interaction into one of the below mentioned classes. This set of page and user interaction classes are highly relevant and generic to most eCommerce platforms. Homepage (H) is the main landing page of the website. Search (S) pages are the pages on which user can provide a query and other parameters to perform a search. A search not only involves the query typed in by the user but also may contain other constraints like price, location or category (for example Electronics or Clothing & Shoes). Detail (V) pages are the pages on which inventory details are presented to the user. Links to these pages are provided as a response to the search done by the user. Purchase (P) pages are the pages associated with the purchase activity done by the user. For example, the page that confirms price and shipping address is one of these pages. Account information (A) pages are the pages which deal with account management. Log in (L) pages are the pages on which a user signs in. This page has been separated as users are usually forced to sign in for purchase pages but not for search pages.
3.3 Browse and Search Trails
Click stream logs collected from user browsing on the website are represented as continuous paths which we refer to as browser trails. Each node in the path is a web-page visited by the user. All pages visited by the user are grouped into various categories as described in Section 3.2.
Search trails in our logs are analogous to search trails described by White et al. in [18]. Search trails begin with a search being issued by the user and terminate at a point where user has finished her searching activity. We approximate the termination point by occurrence of certain activities in the browser trail. For example if a user visits purchase

Figure 1: Example browser trail from click stream logs. Search block are tagged using following convention name:query. For example S1 event was search done using query "argyle apple". The back arrow means that user went back to S1 (or branching point). Time increases from left to right and from top to bottom.
page then the search trail is assumed to have ended. Page timeouts and closing of browser window are also considered as the end of search trail. We define a search trail as being successful if the search trail ends in the purchase page.
Figure 1 displays an example browse trail and its corresponding search trail. This trail depicts a user entering the web site at Homepage(H1) and then performing a search "argyle apple" (S1). She changes the query and reissues the search "argyle leather apple" (S2). On this search result page the user clicked on two results and went to detail pages of those two items (V 1, V 2). User reissued the search with a different query "sena argyle leather " (S3). She then generalizes the query to "sena argyle" in (S4) and views detail page of an item (V 3) in the result set. The user then purchases the item by visiting purchase pages (P urchase). In the example described above the search trail would be S1  S2  V 1  V 2  S3  S4  V 3  P urchase.
Zero recall search trail (ZRST) is defined as search trails with at least one zero recall search in them.
Non-zero recall search trail (NZRST) is defined as search trails with no zero recall search in them.
We also define notion of post zero-recall search trails (PZR search trails). PZR search trails are sub trails of search trails but they start with the first zero-recall search encountered in the search trail. These trails denote the user activity after the user has seen the zero-recall search to the end of the trail. Let's say that S3 in search trail in Figure 1 was a zero recall search, then the PZRS trail would be given by; S3  S4  V 3.
Defining trail end point as purchase or timeout has advantages. Firstly the quest to find the right item to purchase is an activity which involves multiple searches. By defining trail endpoint this way we are also able to include all the activity done by the user in other open tabs and windows of the browser. Since this patching is browser cookie based it can only stitch activity done by the user on the same browser. It also provides a holistic view of the user experience on the website. The search trail of a user who had to stumble through many searches and item detail pages has a different finger-print than the trail of a user who was able to succeed in one step.
Search trails are encoded to a string for studying various patterns in the trail. For this we encode a zero-recall search to alphabet Z and non-zero recall search to alphabet S. Detail page view obtained by click on a search result is converted to V whereas purchases are encoded to P .

77

Closing of the page or time outs are encoded as E. For example the trail in the example will be encoded to the string SSV V SSV P . This helps us encode certain type of trails as a regular expression over an alphabet. Alphabet set  = {Z, S, V, P, E}. For example a trail starting with zerorecall query and ending with exit are encoded as Z  E. Here  encodes any alphabet with repetition count of zero or more.
4. CHARACTERISTICS OF ZERO RECALL SEARCHES
In this we section we present the general first order characteristic of zero recall queries. We compare and contrast the characteristics of these queries with those of non-zero recall queries. We find some interesting differences in query distributions and patterns. We examine statistics of zero recall queries such as the length of an individual query, the number of terms per query and the query distribution and repetition pattern.
4.1 Linguistic Analysis
The quality of experience that can be provided to users is dependent on the amount of understanding about queries the engine possesses. We studied characteristics of zero recall queries along different dimensions and the information around extracted attributes is shown in Figure 2.
In order to detect adjectives, conjunctions, prepositions and articles we used the Stanford NLP Group's POS Tagger trained on an English language corpus [15]. We also used human generated lists for celebrity and brand names. As the tagger was trained on a different corpus and the extraction of attributes was done based on simple string match algorithms, the results are conservative estimates of the actual percentages. All possible nick names of the celebrity or all abbreviations of the brand may not be present in the list hence making these percentages conservative estimates. If the brand or celebrity name to which the query pertains can be known, it can be effectively used for query suggestions and merchandising (even if the query cannot be matched to any relevant inventory).

4.2 First Order Analysis, Uniqueness and Temporal Volatility
In this section we provide first order analysis of zero recall queries and non-zero recall queries. We compare character lengths, term lengths, repetition factor and uniqueness of these queries.
Term length analysis of queries is provided in Table 2. Zero recall queries tend to be longer. Number of terms used on average is 3.8 compared to 2.3 terms used for non-zero recall queries. Zero recall queries are more verbose than non-zero recall queries by 1.5 terms on average. Zero recall queries tend to be longer in number of characters as well. Average characters used for zero recall queries are 21 compared to 13 for non-zero recall queries. Users can do negation and disjunction through query. For example, "father's day (gift, product) -old". The term old should not appear in any result and atleast one of the words gift or product should appear. We refer them as advanced queries. Advanced query length can be large.

Table 2: First order analysis of zero recall queries

and non zero recall queries with respect to (a) Num-

ber of terms. (b) Number of characters

Terms per query

Zero recall Non zero recall

All searches Unique queries

Avg Median StdDev
Max Avg Median StdDev Max

3.83 3
2.56 1971 4.65
3 3.47 1971

2.37 2
1.82 1286 3.8
3 2.74 1286

Characters per query
Avg All searches Median
StdDev Max Avg
Unique queries Median StdDev Max

Zero recall
21.68 21 13.7
4484 21.3 20 14.4 4484

Non zero recall
13.24 13 11.9
4292 21.5 20 15.3 4292

The zero recall queries are close to being unique. As shown in Table 3 zero recall queries have a repetition factor of 1.4. Non-zero recall queries on the other hand have a repetition factor of 20. Even the most popular zero recall queries do not repeat more than tens of thousands of times within a month. But the most popular non-zero recall query repeats more than millions of times.

Figure 2: Zero recall searches covered by various attributes.
Being able to extract properties such as numerals, adjectives, conjunctions from queries can be useful in devising a strategy to predict the necessity of a query term to search for desired items along the lines of work described by Zhao and Callan in [19].

Table 3: Repetition factor for zero recall queries

and non-zero recall queries. Zero recall queries are

almost unique (1.45 repetition factor); whereas non-

zero recall queries have a heavy head.

Repetition count

Zero recall queries

1.45

Non-zero recall queries

19.57

Figure 3(a) describes the quantity of search traffic covered by only top-k most popular queries. Top 10% most popular

78

Percentage of searches covered Single day zero recall query overlap

Percentage of searches covered by top k% queries.

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20
10
0 0

Zero recall queries Non-zero recall queries

20

40

60

80

100

Top k% of queries by traffic

(a)

Single day zero recall query overlap with historical queries 30

25

20

15

10

5

0

5

10 15 20 25 30 35

Number of days

(b)

Figure 3: (a)Search traffic coverage of top k% most popular queries. Only 30% of zero recall searches are covered by 10% most popular zero-recall queries. But 90% of non-zero recall search traffic is generated by 10% most popular queries. (b) Overlap of single day zero recall queries with historical queries.

queries only cover 30% of zero recall search traffic. But for non-zero recall queries top 10% most popular queries cover 90% of the search traffic. This shows that the zero recall search traffic has extremely thin head and long tail. Further more Figure 3(b) describes day over day over lap of zero recall queries. For this all zero recall queries that appeared in a single day were taken. Then overlap was computed over historically occurring queries. It was observed that any two separate days have only 7% zero recall queries in common. When the historical zero recall queries time period is increased to 32 days then also the overlap only increases to 28%. As can be seen in the figure adding more historical data has diminishing returns with respect to amount of queries overlapping.
Zero recall queries have a long tail and do not repeat so often over time. Hence it is not practical to apply techniques that rely on query specific models to zero recall searches.
5. ZERO RECALL SEARCHES AND USER BEHAVIOR
In this section we describe how and when zero recall searches are generated. We also study the effect they have on the users and how the search trails are impacted due to zero recall searches. We also discuss the variability of effect of zero recall searches on power users and novice users.
5.1 Generation of Zero Recall Searches
Zero recall searches are caused because of various reason. The zero-recall queries are much longer than non-zero recall queries. In eCommerce domain as the documents are shorter and far less than web domain, query verbosity is the major reason for search being a zero-recall search. For example the following query "aquasource kitchen faucet with sprayer 2 chrome handle" likely leads to no results on major commerce search engines. The faucet might match but the color chrome may not match leading to a zero recall search. For users who have a strong preference for a specific color,

ignoring color information and showing relevant items may not be the best strategy.
Another reason for zero recall search is the temporal volatility of the document space. As the items are being sold they are being removed from the marketplace. Non-zero recall queries may turn into zero recall queries due to this reason. Some zero recall queries also transition to non-zero recall queries. Queries have seasonal (for example Christmas, Thanksgiving) and buzz [12] (for example world cup) properties. Just like queries item corpora (supply) in the eCommerce market place also has seasonal and buzz properties. That is items being sold in holiday season may not be available during summer, Valentine's day based inventory is only available close to valentine's day. The queries (demand) are also seasonal in their peaks. But many queries do not go down to zero in off season. At that time it can lead to zero-recall searches.
Figure 3(b) shows the magnitude of volatility among zero recall queries. To compute the volatility in the inventorydocument space we conducted an experiment. Instead of performing search over products currently being sold in the market place we performed the search over inventory that was available even once in previous year.For this we indexed historical inventory from previous year.We randomly sampled 500k queries from the set of current zero recall queries. We ran these queries on the historical cumulative index and found that 22% of queries became non-zero recall. Another reason for zero recall searches is difference in vocabulary between seller and buyers.
We also notice a considerable difference in fraction of zero recall search trails to non-zero recall search trails per user between novice and power users. Table 4 shows the fraction of zero recall search trails to non-zero recall search trails per user for different segment. The ratio of ZRST to NZRST per user is 81% higher for novice users as compared to power users.
Zero recall searches are more likely to occur in the beginning of the search trails. Figure 4 shows the fraction of zero recall searches as a function of position of zero recall

79

Table 4: Fraction of zero recall search trails to non-

zero recall search trails per user for different seg-

ments. The ratio of ZRST to NZRST per user is

81% higher for novice users as compared to power

users. User segment

ZRST per user N ZRST per user

Normalized rate of ZRST per NZRST per user

All users

0.35

1

Power

0.22

0.64

Novice

0.4

1.12

Zero recall search with respect to position in search trail

0.4

Power users

0.35

Novice users

Fraction of ZRS

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

1

2

3

4

5

Position of ZRS in search trail

Figure 4: Zero recall searches are plotted with respect to their position in the search trail. Novice users do more zero recall searches in beginning of search trail (35%) than power users (30%). Half of the zero-recall searches occur within first 3 searches in search trails.

search in the trail. Novice users are more likely to perform ZRS in the first position than power users. Moreover 50% of ZRS done by power users occur within first 3 searches of search trail whereas for the same three position novice users do 58% of zero recall search.
Both of the above mentioned facts namely novice users do more ZRS per NZRS per user compared to power users and they are more likely to do them early in the search trail can be explained due to the fact that power users have more prior information in the domain than novice users. This puts novice users at much bigger disadvantage. Hence more coping strategies needed to be provided by the search engine to novice users, especially at the beginning of the search trails.
5.2 Effect of Zero Recall Searches on Users
Zero recall searches are a common phenomenon in the user's quest to find a relevant item for purchase. But zero recall searches present themselves as a big hindrance in the user's quest. Some users end their searching as soon as they experience zero recall searches. Others tend to reformulate their query to search for the relevant items. In this section we show the effect of zero recall searches on various user segments.
We notice that the purchase rate drops when the users experience a zero recall search in their search trail. A user with zero-recall search in her search trail has a purchase rate which is 0.64 times the purchase rate of user who did not

Table 5: For a user segment compares degradation of

purchase rate for zero recall search trails from non-

zero recall search trails. Purchase rate for power

users degrades by a lower amount (0.32) when com-

pared to novice users (0.39)

User segment All users

P urchase rate f or ZRST P urchase rate f or N ZRST
0.63

Power users

0.68

Novices

0.61

experience zero recall search. Table 5 describes this factor for various user segments. Power users who have seen a ZRS in their search trails have a purchase rate (probability) of 0.68 time the purchase rate of power users which have not seen a ZRS. Similarly for novice users this factor is 0.61. That is power users who see a ZRS see a degradation of 32% in purchase rate but for novice users the degradation is 39%. Hence ZRS have more detrimental effect on novice users than on power users. Power users are more familiar with the domain and the search engine and marketplace. Hence they are able to reformulate queries efficiently and successfully.
Zero recall searches experienced early in search trails are more damaging to purchase probability when compared with zero-recall searches experienced later in the search trail. Figure 5 presents the normalized purchase probability as a function of the position of zero recall searches in the search trail. A power user is able to overcome zero recall search with a much higher probability if it occurs late in the searching experience. Novice users on the other hand cannot cope with zero recall searches. They are most negatively affected if they experience it early in their interaction. As majority of ZRS happen early for novice users it is more damaging for eCommerce marketplaces.

Figure 5: Normalized purchase probability as a function of the position of zero recall search in the search trail. Early zero recall searches are more damaging than later zero recall searches and they are more damaging for novice users than power users.
Novice users are twice as likely to give up immediately when they see ZRS as compared to power users. 16% of novice users exit the site without doing any other search after ZRS compared to only 8% of power users. Many users interpret zero recall search as no items of relevance present in the marketplace. Also they are not sophisticated enough in reformulating the query to represent the same intention.

80

Figure 7: Two PZRS trails which start with same zero-recall search. The top one is done by a novice user and the bottom one is done by a power user. The novice stumbles 2 times S2, S3 before exiting. She is never able to reformulate the query to get desired results. Whereas power user stumbles once and then is able to move to a desirable search S3 leading to purchase.

Fraction of users vs number of searches after ZRS

0.18 Power users

0.16

Novice users

Fraction of users

0.14

0.12

0.1

0.08

0.06

0.04

0

1

2

3

4

5

Number of searches after ZRS

Figure 6: Fraction of zero recall search trails as a function of length of the search trail after the user experienced zero recall search. 0 corresponds to user giving up immediately and not doing any more searches which is twice as large for novice user (17%) compared to power users (8%). Power users are doing more searches after ZRS which shows they are persistent and not giving up easily.

Hence features like query suggestions and product merchandising become extremely important for these users.
For studying the effect of zero recall searches given the same intent of the user we collected set of trails which have same zero recall search in them. These zero recall searches were done by at least one power user and one novice user. To remove the effect of inventory volatility we only considered searches not more than a few days apart. Just in these set of trails we evaluated the difference of effect of zero recall searches on power users and novice users. Figure 7 shows one such pair of post zero recall search trail. Top PZR search trail is done by a novice user whereas the lower PZR search trail is done by a power user. Both start with a zero recall search "helicopter volitation spare parts cheap". These users are searching for spare parts for Volitation brand toy helicopter. The novice user reformulated the query to "helicopter volitation replace parts" (S2) which also returned zero results. This user did another query (S3) which returned zero results and at this time user gave up. On the other hand power user (bottom trail) reformulates the zero recall search (S1) to "helicopter volitation" (S2) from where she learned the most appropriate refinement query "helicopter

volitation blades" (S3). On this page she views two item details (V 1, V 2) and proceeds to purchase one of those.
Table 6 compares the purchase rates for novice users and power users when they are put into same scenarios. Power users succeed in purchasing with a 53% higher rate than novice users.

Table 6: Given set of zero recall search trails with

same intent, purchase rate for user segment normal-

ized by purchase rate for novice. Purchase rate for

power users is 53% higher than of the novice users.

User segment Normalized purchase rate

Novice

1

Power users

1.53

Average user

1.1

Table 7: Table of comparison between Power users

and Novice users. It compares generation of zero re-

call search trails, effect of ZRS on purchase activity

and browsing .

Metric

Power Novice

ZRST per NZRST per user 0.22 0.4

Degradation of purchase rate due to ZRS

0.68

0.61

Exit rates in PZRST

15% 20%

Weak recovery in PZRST 85% 80%

Strong recovery in PZRST 68% 62%

5.3 User Recovery
In this subsection we discuss how users cope with and recover from zero-recall searches. We define two concepts of recovery from zero-recall searches. User is defined to have weak recovered or just recovered if she does a search with non zero recall after the zero-recall search. A strong recovery is defined as user doing a search with non-zero recall on which she clicks on at least one result item after the zero recall search is done. Strong recovery is a more stronger definition of recovery than the weak recovery because in the case of strong recovery a user not only performs a search with non-zero recall after the ZRS, but that search also return relevant items that user gets interested enough to click on them. Hence a strong recovery always imply a weak recovery but a weak recovery may not lead to strong recovery.
Post zero recall search trails ending at weak recovery point are called weak recovery trail. PZR search trails ending in

81

(a)

(b)

Figure 8: Different strategies used by power users and novice users to recover from zero recall searches (a) Usage of mechanisms normalized by average usage. (b) Recovery query comparison with zero recall query.

strong recovery point are called strong recovery trails. For example a search trail of S1  S2  S3  S4  S5  V  Exit where S2 and S3 were zero recall searches and S1, S4, S5 were non-zero recall searches would give us following PZR search trail: S2  S3  S4  S5  V  Exit and weak recovery trail: S2  S3  S4 and following strong recovery trail S2  S3  S4  S5  V .
Many PZR search trails do not end in recovery, i.e. nonzero recall searches or a click on the search result to item detail page. These recovery trails end with an exit and correspond to users who failed to recover. For example the search trail S1  S2  S3  Exit. Where S1 is a non-zero recall search and S2, S3 are zero recall searches the recovery trail is S2  S3  Exit.
Figure 6 showed that 16% of novice and 8% of power users give up without any other search after the zero recall search. In general we observed that 15% of power users exit the site without doing weak recovery whereas 20% novice users exit the site without doing weak recovery.
5.3.1 Weak Recovery and Strategies Used
We analyzed the mechanisms used by users to recover from zero recall queries. Users either tend to use assistive features provided by the site (for example, query suggestions, query reduction by dropping terms etc.) or undertake the effort to reformulate their queries in order to recover. We observed a considerable difference in PZR search trails of novice and power users. Novices tend to use assistive features more whereas power users tend to reformulate queries themselves in order to recover. We also studied query reformulation i.e. how different are the reformulated queries as compared to the original zero recall queries.
Figure 8 compares the strategy used by two user segments to perform weak recovery. Figure 8(a) compares the site features used by different user segments. The usage is normalized with respect to an average user. Power users wrongly spell queries 0.84 times that of an average user where as novice users wrongly spell queries at par with average user. This is due to the fact that novice users commit more spelling mistakes than power user.
Usage of assistive features like query suggestions, recommendation of dropping of terms etc. is used at a smaller rate than of average user in both segments. Power user change the query terms themselves at a 1.11 factor larger than the average user. Whereas novice user changes the query themselves at the similar rate of that of an average user. This

implies that power users change the query themselves at 10% higher rate than novice users and weak recover.
In those cases we compared the terms of the recovering query with the zero recall query. Figure 8(b) provides the results of this analysis. Novice users tend to drop terms and do queries which are subset of the zero recall queries at a 13% higher rate than the power user. The disadvantage of doing this is that they will not be able to represent all the constraint represented by the terms that were relevant to them. Also shorter sub queries are more likely to return a large recall set and overwhelm the user. Power users are more likely to change the query terms. This can be due to the much richer knowledge of domain vocabulary possessed by the power users.
For example in eBay category for chandeliers we found that sellers use "unique", "antique" and "vintage" to describe the same style of chandeliers. One of the power buyers after doing a search of "crystal chandelier one of kind " which gives a zero recall changed it to "crystal chandelier unique" and then "crystal chandelier antique" both of them are nonzero recall searches and highly relevant to the power buyers intent.
5.3.2 Strong Recovery
Although 85% of power users weak recover, only 68% strong recover. This implies that PZR search trails reaching to a non-zero recall search does not necessarily imply that the results returned were relevant to the user. Table 8 provide a detail view of the number of users strong recovering. Only 62% of novice users are able to strong recover. This number is lower than the average recovery rate of 64.2%.
5.4 Recovery Analysis
In this subsection we describe the analysis of recovery. We measure it along two dimensions namely user frustration and effort and recovery quality.
5.4.1 User Frustration and Effort to Recovery
User frustration and effort is approximated by the amount of time spent and the number of searches user has to do to recover. These numbers encapsulate user frustration and effort because for every additional search user is paying a price both in terms of effort and time. It requires time to enter a new query and also effort is required in coming up with new relevant keywords to express the same buying intent. As the effort required in finding relevant items increases so

82

Fraction of strong recovery trails Normalized search quality

does the frustration level of the user. We define
U ser ef f ort = # searches to recovery
Figure 9 provides the breakdown of fraction of recovery trails as a function of number of searches in them. It can be seen that that 66% strong recovery trail contain more than or equal to 2 searches.
Table 8 below provides with further high level break down into interesting recovery trail patterns. Half of the users who end their trails without recovery do so by performing at least 2 searches. Also 2 out of 3 strong recoveries require at least 2 searches by the user after the zero-recall search is performed. All these users are stumbling to find the right search query that will return relevant results.
A more continuous measure of effort is presented in Figure 9. The recovery trails ending in strong recovery are broken down into various chunks based on number of searches they did after a ZRS to achieve strong recovery. Only 1 in 3 strong recoveries happen in 1 search. All other strong recovery require user to perform at least 2 searches. This can weigh heavily on user patience and lead to a bad user experience.

Searches to strong recovery w.r.t. fraction of trails 0.35

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Number of searches to strong recovery

Figure 9: Number of searches it takes to strong re-

covery.

Only

32%

(

1 3

)

of

strong

recoveries

happen

with one search. Remaining 66% strong recovery

take two or more searches. This can lead to lot of

user effort and frustration.

5.4.2 Recovery Quality
Although users search trail might be returning to non-zero recall searches but those searches may not be good with respect to user intent. For example a user doing a query "adidas originals women tracksuit bottoms large" which leads to zero recall due to over-specialization dropped terms "women", "large", "tracksuit" to get to non-zero recall query "adidas originals bottoms". However, there are lot of key aspects which are missing in the result set for this new query.
We define the quality of recovery as a function of quality of searches performed by the user in the recovery trail. The quality of a search is defined as probability of the event that user clicks on a search result presented to her as the answer to the search. For this we measure the click through percentage of search. We compare the searches that happen after the zero recall search with searches happening in search trails in which zero-recall searches never happened.
Figure 10 describes the quality of searches performed after the zero-recall search in the PZR search trail. It also

Quality of search w.r.t to search position 1.2

1.1

1

0.9

Non-zero recall search trails

0.8

PZR search trail

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Search with in the trail

Figure 10: Normalized quality of search as position of search in trail. The normalization is done by the first search in the trail. The search quality (Pr[search will get a click]) in post zero-recall search trail detoriates with position. Although for non-zero recall search trail the quality improves initially and then slightly decreases.

compares the quality with the searches in the non-zero re-

call search trails. The quality numbers are normalized by

the quality of first search in the trail. Probability[search

getting click] or quality increases in non-zero recall search

trails. This can be explained by the fact that as users per-

form more searches, they change their queries to be more

relevant to their intent. After five searches it starts drop-

ping as users start dropping off.

For PZR search trails the quality of searches keep on de-

grading with the search count within the trail. Normalized

view probability (search quality) for searches in PZRS re-

duces

to

1 3

value

of

the

corresponding

searches

in

non-zero

recall search trails. Although users are able to get to non-

zero recall searches in their recovery trails, but those non

zero-recall searches are of much lower relevance to the user

on average. This conveys a lack of discovery of right inven-

tory by that user in PZR search trails. Hence, tools and

features to enable these users in discovering exciting and

relevant inventory are necessary.

6. DISCUSSION
Concise product descriptions, stricter user expectations and volatile inventory collections differentiate eCommerce search from web search. In this paper, we described user behavior in zero recall searches, a common and important phenomenon in the eCommerce domain. Our contributions are an analysis of the following:
· Cause of Zero Recall Searches: We studied how zero recall is cause by differences in buyer and seller vocabulary and limited and dynamic inventory described by short descriptions.
· User Reaction to Zero Recall: We discussed how zero recall queries lead to user frustration and a degradation in purchase rates. We also saw how most users try to recover from such situations through query reformulation.

83

Table 8: Various post zero recall (PZR) search trail patterns. The PZR trails are segmented into those which exited and those which strong recovered by getting to an item detail view page from search.

Trail Path

Explanation

Power Novice All

Z+

All trails

100% 100% 100%

Z(Z|S)*E ZE
Z(S|Z)E Z(Z|S)(Z|S)+E

No strong recovery

All trails with no strong recovery Exit with no other searches Exit with 1 more search Exit with  2 more search

29.76% 7.53% 7.31% 14.93%

36.64% 9.66% 7.94% 19.05%

34.26% 8.82% 7.46% 17.98%

Z(Z|S)*V

All trails with strong recovery 68.09% 61.95% 64.24%

ZSV

Strong recovery

Z(Z|S)(Z|S)+V

1 search to strong recovery

21.87% 20.56% 21.07%

 2 searches to strong recovery 46.22% 41.39% 43.18%

ZZ*

Users who do zero recall searches twice

21.71% 22.15% 21.45%

· Variability in behavior of novices and power users: We discussed that power users are less impacted as compared to novices (see Table 7). Power users seem to be able to reformulate queries more intelligently in order to recover as compared to novices. Under zero recall situations for the same task and query, power users are 50% more likely to be eventually successful as compared to novice users.
Zero recall searches have negative effects on user conversion. Also, user variability poses unique challenges for an eCommerce search engine. Variability also implies that the engine has to offer features which can cater to all segments of users. Some of these issues can be tackled by personalization in search engines. As power users tend to react to difficult situations better and possess unique knowledge of the domain, intelligence from power trails can be used to learn and help other users. We would like to address this as part of future work.
7. REFERENCES
[1] E. Agichtein, E. Brill, and S. T. Dumais. Improving web search ranking by incorporating user behavior information. In Proceedings of SIGIR, pages 19­26, 2006.
[2] R. A. Baeza-Yates, C. A. Hurtado, M. Mendoza, and G. Dupret. Modeling user search behavior. In LA-WEB, pages 242­251, 2005.
[3] S. Bhavnani. Domain-specific search strategies for the effective retrieval of healthcare and shopping information. In CHI Extended Abstracts, pages 610­611, 2002.
[4] D. C. Blair and M. E. Maron. An evaluation of retrieval effectiveness for a full-text document-retrieval system. In Commun. ACM, 1985.
[5] A. Z. Broder, M. Fontoura, E. Gabrilovich, A. Joshi, V. Josifovski, and T. Zhang. Robust classification of rare queries using web knowledge. In Proceedings of SIGIR, pages 231­238, 2007.
[6] L. A. Granka, T. Joachims, and G. Gay. Eye-tracking analysis of user behavior in www search. In Proceedings of SIGIR, pages 478­479, 2004.
[7] M. A. Hasan, N. Parikh, G. Singh, and N. Sundaresan. Query suggestion for e-commerce sites. In Proceedings of the WSDM, 2011.
[8] C. H¨olscher and G. Strube. Web search behavior of internet experts and newbies. computer networks. In Computer Networks, volume 33, pages 337­346, 2000.

[9] R. Kang and W.-T. Fu. Exploratory information search by domain experts and novices. In Proceedings of IUI, pages 329­332, 2010.
[10] A. W. Lazonder, H. J. A. Biemans, and I. G. J. H. Wopereis. Differences between novice and experienced users in searching information on the world wide web. In JASIS, volume 51, pages 576­581, 2000.
[11] N. Parikh and N. Sundaresan. Inferring semantic query relations from collective user behavior. In Proceedings of CIKM, pages 349­358, 2008.
[12] N. Parikh and N. Sundaresan. Buzz-based recommender system. In Proceedings of WWW, 2009.
[13] M. S. Pera. Improving library searches using word-correlation factors and folksonomies. In Master of Science Thesis, Department of Computer Science, Brigham Young University, 2009.
[14] A. Singla, R. White, and J. Huang. Studying trailfinding algorithms for enhanced web search. In Proceedings of SIGIR, pages 443­450, 2010.
[15] K. Toutanova. Enriching the knowledge sources used in a maximum entropy part-of-speech tagger. In EMNLP/VLC, 2000.
[16] R. W. White and S. M. Drucker. Investigating behavioral variability in web search. In Proceedings of WWW, pages 21­30, 2007.
[17] R. W. White, S. T. Dumais, and J. Teevan. Characterizing the influence of domain expertise on web search behavior. In Proceedings of WSDM, pages 132­141, 2009.
[18] R. W. White and J. Huang. Assessing the scenic route: measuring the value of search trails in web logs. In Proceedings of SIGIR, pages 587­594, 2010.
[19] L. Zhao and J. Callan. Term necessity prediction. In CIKM, pages 259­268, 2010.

84

