Preface from the General Chairs
Welcome to the 34th ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in information retrieval, and welcome to Beijing!
The whole Chinese IR community is delighted to host this year's SIGIR conference for the first time in China in the historical and vibrant city of Beijing. The last decade has witnessed the great surge of China's Internet and search engine industry as one of the largest and most active in the world. The SIGIR conferences have also seen increased Chinese participation: the number of full papers from China has reached a record high of 18 this year, while more than half of them have at least one Chinese name as author. This year's SIGIR conference is a significant opportunity to forge stronger ties between the Chinese IR community and the international SIGIR community. We hope that you will enjoy the great technical program as well as the supporting events in connection with the search engine industry in China.
The conference promises to be a success, with a record number of full papers to be presented. The program committee, chaired by Ricardo Baeza-Yates, Tat-Seng Chua and Bruce Croft and helped by 43 area chairs and many reviewers, did a great job in selecting high quality papers that reflect the latest developments in IR. We are equally grateful to all the other committee members: the Posters and Demos chairs Kevyn Collins-Thompson, Gary Geunbae Lee, and Massimo Melucci; the Tutorial chair Yi Zhang; the Workshops chairs Noriko Kando and Luo Si; the Mentoring Program chair Gareth Jones; the Outstanding Paper Award chair Susan Dumais; the Doctoral Consortium chairs Marteen de Rijke and Paul Thomas; the Industrial Track chairs David Carmel and Haifeng Wang; and the Publication chair Zaiqing Nie. We are especially grateful to Jimmy Huang for his active attraction of corporate sponsorship. The conference also benefits from the great help of the Local Organization Committee, chaired by Xiaoming Li. Special thanks go to Hang Li and Ling Huang for their involvement throughout the preparation of this conference.
SIGIR'11 is sponsored by ACM and has received generous financial support from a large number of companies and organizations. To date, Microsoft Research supports at the Diamond level; Baidu, EMC, Google, Tencent and Yahoo! provide Gold support; eBay is a Silver supporter; HP, IBM Research and Yandex take part at the Bronze level; while Springer, Now Publishers and Morgan & Claypool exhibit their products. SIGIR'11 is organized in association with the Chinese Information Processing Society. Finally, we are thankful to the University of Montreal for allowing Jian-Yun Nie to devote himself entirely to this conference during the last 6 months, and we thank ACM and the SIGIR Executive Committee for their constant support.
We hope you will enjoy the conference and your visit to Beijing and China.

Wei-Ying Ma Microsoft Research Asia

Jian-Yun Nie University of Montreal

