S-PLSA+: Adaptive Sentiment Analysis with Application to Sales Performance Prediction

Yang Liu§,, Xiaohui Yu,§, Xiangji Huang, and Aijun An
§School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong University Jinan, Shandong, China, 250101
York University, Toronto, ON, Canada, M3J 1P3
yliu@sdu.edu.cn,xhyu@yorku.ca,jhuang@yorku.ca,aan@cse.yorku.ca

ABSTRACT
Analyzing the large volume of online reviews would produce useful knowledge that could be of economic values to vendors and other interested parties. In particular, the sentiments expressed in the online reviews have been shown to be strongly correlated with the sales performance of products. In this paper, we present an adaptive sentiment analysis model called S-PLSA+, which aims to capture the hidden sentiment factors in the reviews with the capability to be incrementally updated as more data become available. We show how S-PLSA+can be applied to sales performance prediction using an ARSA model developed in previous literature. A case study is conducted in the movie domain, and results from preliminary experiments confirm the effectiveness of the proposed model.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.4.0 [Information Systems Applications]: General
General Terms
Algorithm, Experiment
Keywords
sentiment analysis, review mining, prediction
1. INTRODUCTION
Online reviews present a wealth of information on products and services, and if properly utilized, can provide vendors highly valuable intelligence to facilitate the improvement of their business. As such, a growing number of recent studies have focused on the economic values of reviews, exploring the relationship between the sales performance of products and their reviews [3, 2, 4]. Gruhl et al. [3] show that the volume of relevant postings can help predict the sales rank of books on Amazon, especially the spikes in sales ranks. Ghose et al. [2] also demonstrate that subjectivity of reviews can have an impact on sales performance.
Liu et al. [4] propose a probability model called Sentiment PLSA (S-PLSA for short) based on the assumption that sentiment consists of multiple hidden aspects. They develop a model called ARSA (which stands for Auto-Regressive Sentiment-Aware) to quantitatively measure the relationship between sentiment aspects and reviews. Our experience with running ARSA on several online review datasets reveals that the model is highly sensitive to the sentiment factors, which are constantly changing over time as new reviews become available. It is therefore essential to allow the SPLSA model to adapt to newly available review data.
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR'10, July 19­23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland. ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

To this end, we take a Bayesian approach, and propose an adaptive version of the S-PLSA model that is equipped with the incremental learning capability for continuously updating the model using newly observed reviews. The proposed model is motivated by the principle of quasi-Bayesian (QB) estimation, which has found successful applications in various domains such as adaptive speech recognition and text retrieval [1]. We call the proposed model the S-PLSA+model, in which the parameters are estimated by maximizing an approximate posterior distribution. One salient feature of our modeling is the judicious use of hyperparameters, which can be recursively updated in order to obtain up-to-date posterior distribution and to estimate new model parameters. This modeling approach makes it possible to efficiently update the model parameters in an incremental manner without the need to re-train the model from scratch each time as new reviews become available.

2. S-PLSA

In the S-PLSA model [4], a review can be considered as being

generated under the influence of a number of hidden sentiment fac-

tors. The use of hidden factors provides the model the ability to

accommodate the intricate nature of sentiments, with each hidden

factor focusing on one specific aspect. What differentiates S-PLSA

from conventional PLSA is its use of a set of appraisal words [4]

as the basis for feature representation. The rationale is that those

appraisal words, such as "good" or "terrible", are more indicative

of the review's sentiments than other words.

For a given set of N reviews D = {d1, . . . , dN }, and the set

of M appraisal words W = {w1, . . . , wM }, the S-PLSA model

dictates that the joint probability of observed pair (di, wj) is gen-

erated by P (di, wj) = P (di)

K k=1

P (wj |zk)P (zk|di),

where

zk  Z = {z1, . . . , zK } corresponds to the latent sentiment fac-

tor, and where we assume that di and wj are independent condi-

tioned on the mixture of associated sentiment factor zk. The set of

parameters  of this model consist of {P (wj|zk), P (zk|di)}, the

maximum likelihood estimates of which can be obtained through

an expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm [4].

3. ADAPTIVE S-PLSA
The S-PLSA model can be trained in a batch manner on a collection of reviews, and then be applied to analyze others. In many cases, however, the reviews are continuously becoming available, with the sentiment factors constantly changing. We thus hope to adapt the model to the newly obtained reviews, in order to make it more suitable to the changing contexts. A naïve way to perform the adaptation is to re-train the model from scratch using all data available including the newly obtained data, which is clearly highly inefficient. Here, we propose a model called S-PLSA+, which performs incremental learning based on the principle of quasi-Bayesian

873

(QB) estimation. The basic idea is to perform updating and down-

dating at the same time by (i) incrementally accumulating statistics

on the training data, and (ii) fading out the out-of-date data. Let Dn be the set of reviews made available at epoch n (e.g.,
the reviews published on a certain day, but the time unit used can be set to be finer or coarser based on the need), and denote by n = {D1, . . . , Dn} the set of reviews obtained up to epoch n. QB S-PLSA estimates at epoch n are determined by maximizing the posterior probability using n:

(n) = arg max P (|n) = arg max P (Dn|)P (|n-1)





In order to allow closed-form recursive update of , we use the

closest tractable prior density g(|(n-1)) with sufficient statistics

to approximate the posterior density P (|n-1), where n-1 is

evolved from review sets n-1. This leads to (n)  arg max P (Dn|)g(|(n-1)). Note that at epoch n, only the new reviews

Dn and the current statistics (n-1) are used to update the S-PLSA+

parameters, and the set of reviews Dn are discarded after new parameter values (n) are obtained, which results in significant sav-

ings in computational resources.

The particular choice of the prior g(|) in our model is the

Dirichlet density, which can be expressed by


KM


N

g(|) =

 P (wj |zk)j,k-1

P (zk|di)k,i-1

k=1 j=1

i=1

where  = {j,k, k,i} are the hyperparameters of the Dirichlet
distribution. Assuming for the moment that (n-1) is known, we can show that (n) can be obtained through an EM algorithm [1].
A major benefit of S-PLSA+ lies in its ability to continuously update the hyperparameters. We can show that the new hyperparameters are given by

|Dn |

(jn,k) =

c(d(in), wj(n))P (n)(zk |d(in), wj(n)) + (jn,k-1)

(1)

i=1

M

k(n,i) =

c(d(in), wj(n))P (n)(zk |d(in), wj(n)) + k(n,i-1).

(2)

j=1

where the posterior P (n)(zk|di(n), wj(n)) is computed using Dn and the current parameters (n), and c(di(n), wj(n)) denotes the number of (d(in), wj(n)) pairs.
To summarize, S-PLSA+works as follows. In the startup phase, initial estimates of the hyperparameters (0) are obtained. Then, at each learning epoch n, (i) new estimates of the parameters (n)
are computed based on the newly available data Dn and hyperpa-
rameters obtained from epoch n - 1; and (ii) new estimates of the hyperparameters (n) are obtained using (1) and (2). This way, the
model is continuously updated when new reviews (Dn) become available, and at the same time fades out historical data n-1, with the information contained in n-1 already captured by (n-1).

4. APPLICATION TO SALES PREDICTION

The proposed S-PLSA+model can be employed in a variety of

tasks, e.g., sentiment clustering, sentiment classification, etc. As a

sample application, we plug it into the ARSA model proposed in

[4], which is used to predict sales performance based on reviews

and past sales data. The original ARSA model uses S-PLSA as the

component for capturing sentiment information. With S-PLSA+,

the ARSA model can be formulated as follows:

p

qR

yt =

iyt-1 +

i,j t-i,j + t,

i=1

i=1 j=1

where (i) yt denotes the sales figure at time t after proper preprocessing such as de-seasoning, (ii) p, q, and R are user-chosen

parameters, (iii) i and i,j are coefficents to be estimated using

training data, and (iv) t,j

=

1 |Rt |

dRt p(zj |d), where Rt is

the set of reviews available at time t and p(zj|d) is computed based

on S-PLSA+. It reflects the sentiment "mass" that can be attributed
to factor zj. The ARSA model can be trained using linear least
squares regression. Note that the notion of time (t) in the ARSA model is different from the epoch (n) in S-PLSA+. For example,
sales prediction can be made for each day using ARSA, whereas the model adaptation of S-PLSA+can happen every other day.

5. EXPERIMENTS

Experiments were conducted on an IMDB dataset to evaluate

the effectiveness of the proposed approach by comparing the prediction accuracy of ARSA using S-PLSA+and that of the original

ARSA. The dataset was obtained from the IMDB Website by col-

lecting 28,353 reviews for 20 drama films released in the US from

May 1, 2006 to September 1, 2006, along with their daily gross

box office revenues. Half of the movies are used for batch training.

For the original ARSA, the trained model is then used to make pre-

dictions in the testing data consisting of the other half the movies. For the proposal model, adaptation of the S-PLSA+component is

performed for each movie in the testing set, in four epochs on four

different days v (v = 2, 4, 6, 8) using the review data available up

to day v. The up-to-date model at day v is then used for subsequent

prediction tasks.

We use the mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) to measure

the prediction accuracy:

MAPE

=

1 T

Ti=1(|Predi-Truei|/Truei),

where T is the number of instances in the testing set, and Predi and

Truei are the predicted value and the true value respectively. The

results on the accuracy of the original ARSA and that of the ARSA

using S-PLSA+updated at Epochs 1-4 (v = 2, 4, 6, 8) respectively

are shown in the table below.

Original Epoch 1 Epoch 2 Epoch 3 Epoch 4

0.352

0.295

0.241

0.247

0.240

The accuracy improves as the model is getting updated in the first two epochs, which demonstrates the benefits of having an incremental model to absorb new information; especially in our case, S-PLSA+allows the models to be adapted to the individual movies. The accuracy stays stable from Epoch 2 through Epoch 4, indicating that no significant new information is available from Epoch 2 to Epoch 4.

6. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have presented an adaptive S-PLSA model that is capable of incrementally updating its parameters and automatically downdating old information when new review data become available. This model has been used in conjunction with the ARSA model for predicting sales performance. Preliminary experimental results show that by allowing the model to be adaptive, we can capture new sentiment factors arising from newly available reviews, which can greatly improve the prediction accuracy. For future work, we plan to study the performance of S-PLSA+in other information retrieval and data mining tasks.

Acknowledgements
This work is supported by NSERC Discovery Grants, an Early Researcher Award of Ontario and an NSFC Grant (No. 60903108).
7. REFERENCES
[1] Jen-Tzung Chien and Meng-Sung Wu. Adaptive bayesian latent semantic analysis. IEEE TASLP, 16(1):198­207, 2008.
[2] Anindya Ghose and Panagiotis G. Ipeirotis. Designing novel review ranking systems: predicting the usefulness and impact of reviews. In ICEC, pages 303­310, 2007.
[3] Daniel Gruhl, R. Guha, Ravi Kumar, Jasmine Novak, and Andrew Tomkins. The predictive power of online chatter. In KDD '05, pages 78­87, 2005.
[4] Yang Liu, Xiangji Huang, Aijun An, and Xiaohui Yu. ARSA: a sentiment-aware model for predicting sales performance using blogs. In SIGIR, pages 607­614, 2007.

874

