Emotion Tagging for Comments of Online News by Meta Classification with Heterogeneous Information Sources

Ying Zhang
Dept. of Computer Science Nankai University
zhangying@dbis.nankai.edu.cn
Lin Dai
Dept. of Computer Science Beijing Institute of Technology
dailiu@bit.edu.cn

Yi Fang
Dept. of Computer Science Purdue University
yfang.purdue@gmail.com
Luo Si
Dept. of Computer Science Purdue University lsi@cs.purdue.edu

Xiaojun Quan
Dept. of Computer Science City University of Hong Kong xiaoquan@student.cityu.edu.hk
Xiaojie Yuan
Dept. of Computer Science Nankai University
yuanxj@nankai.edu.cn

ABSTRACT
With the rapid growth of online news services, users can actively respond to online news by making comments. Users often express subjective emotions in comments such as sadness, surprise and anger. Such emotions can help understand the preferences and perspectives of individual users, and therefore may facilitate online publishers to provide users with more relevant services. This paper tackles the task of predicting emotions for the comments of online news. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first research work for addressing the task. In particular, this paper proposes a novel Meta classification approach that exploits heterogeneous information sources such as the content of the comments and the emotion tags of news articles generated by users. The experiments on two datasets from online news services demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search and Retrieval General Terms: Algorithms, Experimentation Keywords: Emotion Tagging, Meta Classification, Online News

sites provide a novel service via which users can share their emotions after reading news articles by selecting emotion tags. Figure 1 shows an example from a popular Chinese news website (i.e., Sina News1). The user-generated emotion tags for news articles can naturally provide guidance for assigning emotion tags to individual comments.
This paper focuses on the research problem of emotion tagging for comments of online news. As far as we know, this is the first research work for addressing the problem. Some prior work tries to predict emotions of online news articles [2, 4]. Most of these techniques for news articles mainly analyze the content information [1, 3]. This paper proposes novel research to exploit heterogeneous information sources with a Meta classification approach by utilizing both the content of comments and available user-generated emotion tags of news articles. In particular, a content-based classifier is built with a text categorization approach, which is combined with the information of emotion tags of news articles within a Meta classifier by a probabilistic combination method.

1. INTRODUCTION
The emergence of social media is reshaping the way how people consume news. Online readers can actively respond to online news by making comments. Users often express subjective emotions in the comments such as sadness, surprise and anger. Such emotions can help understand the preferences and perspectives of individual users, and therefore may facilitate online publishers to provide users with more personalized services. It is a challenging and practical research problem to automatically assign emotion tags to users' comments of online news. One natural approach to achieving the goal is to classify users' comments into different emotion tags based on the contents of the comments. On the other side, an increasing number of social news web-
This research is partially supported by NSF of China research grants 61170184, and also partially supported by NSF research grants IIS-0746830, CNS-1012208 and IIS-1017837.
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR'12, August 12­16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA. ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

Figure 1: An example of emotion tags voted by 244 users for a Sina news article. The emotion labels (from left to right) are: touched, sympathetic, bored, angry, amused, sad, surprised and fervent.

2. METHODS

In this paper, we adopt two heterogeneous information

sources of users' comments of online news. The first one is

based on a text categorization approach with contents of the

comments, namely Content-based Model (CM). Formally,

the probability that the ith comment will be tagged as a

predefined emotion ek  E(k = 1, 2, ..., NE) by this method, referred as cik, can be expressed as follows in terms of soft-

max function over a linear function of features,

cik = P (ek|i) =

exp(kT i)

NE r=1

exp(rT

i)

(1)

1http://news.sina.com.cn/society/

1059

Here the feature vector i is composed by the count of each term in the ith comment. k denotes the combination pa-
rameters for each term with emotion ek, and can be esti-

mated by maximizing log-likelihood function with L2 (i.e.,

ridge) regularization. It is worth noting that

NE k=1

cik

=

1.

The second one is derived from the emotion tags of news

articles generated by users, namely User Emotion Tags Mod-

el (UM). We can follow the ratio of votes of each emotion to

all emotions for tagging emotion for comments. Let uik denote how likely the ith comment will be tagged by emotion

ek according to the information of emotion tags.

To better integrate the two heterogeneous information

sources, a Meta classifier approach is utilized for emotion

tagging of users' comments, called Meta Classification Mod-

el (MCM). We use the outputs of the above models as fea-

tures, and also add a constant feature as the bias. Therefore,

the probability that emotion ek will be assigned to the ith

comment can be estimated as below,

P (ek|ci, ui) =

exp(k +

NE l=1

lk cil

+

NE l=1

lk uil )

NE r=1

exp(r

+

NE l=1

lr cil

+

NE l=1

lr uil )

where ,  and  denote the combination parameters for bias, the source of comments content and the source of emotion tags of news articles respectively. These parameters can be determined by maximizing the log-likelihood function (i.e., Quasi-Newton optimization method in this paper).

3. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
We collected most-viewed news articles and their some most popular comments and emotion tags, in one month of 2011 from the society channel of Sina News and the entertainment channel of QQ News2. Both Sina and QQ are among the largest news portals in China. We use these Chinese datasets since we have not found similar services in English yet, but the proposed model is language independent. We then sample 200 news articles from each news service to construct our two datasets. All news articles and users' comments are segmented to terms by a Chinese word segmentation software: ICTCLAS3. The two datasets contain 8,794 distinct terms in 3,593 comments and 9,401 distinct terms in 3,623 comments respectively. For each dataset, one person was asked to label an emotion tag for each comment from 8 predefined emotion categories which are the same as the emotion tags in news services. The distributions of labeled comments on the 8 emotions are shown in Figure 2.
We compare the performances of emotion tagging using CM, UM and MCM with 10-fold cross validation on two dataset. Two measures are adopted: mean reciprocal rank (MRR) and accuracy (A@n). Given a comment c, its labeled emotion ec and predicted emotion set Enc including n topranked emotions, Ac@n is defined as,

Ac@n =

1, ec  Enc 0, ec / Enc

(2)

Thus, A@n for the collection C is: A@n = cC Ac@n/|C|. Table 1 shows MRR and A@n(n = 1, 2, 3) in each dataset.
A@n(n = 1, 2, ..., 8) is shown in Figure 3. Based on these results, we can make the following observations: 1) CM performs much better than UM. This seems to indicate that

2http://ent.qq.com/. 3http://www.ictclas.org.

content of comments is more effective and reliable than users' emotion tags of news articles, as a single data source to tag emotions for comments. 2) MCM consistently outperforms CM and UM in terms of all evaluation measures. A paired t-test shows that all improvements of MCM over CM are statistically significant with p-value < 0.001. This indicates that it is more effective that exploiting heterogeneous information sources with a Meta classification approach by utilizing both the content of comments and users' emotion tags of news articles than the methods using either single source, as each source provides its own insight on tagging emotions for the comments of online news.

Figure 2: The distributions of labeled comments on 8 predefined emotions in each dataset.

Table 1: MRR and accuracy@1,2,3 of each dataset.

Sina set

QQ set

MRR A@1 A@2 A@3 MRR A@1 A@2 A@3

UM 0.54 0.35 0.50 0.62 0.52 0.32 0.46 0.61

CM 0.65 0.47 0.66 0.78 0.65 0.49 0.65 0.76

MCM 0.69 0.53 0.70 0.82 0.67 0.50 0.67 0.79

Figure 3: Accuracy at all positions of each dataset.
4. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper focuses on emotion tagging for users' comments of online news by considering heterogeneous information sources. The empirical results on two testbeds have shown the effectiveness of the proposed approach. This work is an initial step towards a promising research direction. The learned feature weights in Meta classification model are fixed for all comments. In the future work, we will propose more sophisticated probabilistic models by enabling the feature weights to be adaptive to specific users or comments. We will also explore to incorporate other information sources.
5. REFERENCES
[1] C. Alm, D. Roth, and R. Sproat. Emotions from text: machine learning for text-based emotion prediction. In EMNLP, pages 579­586, 2005.
[2] S. Bao, S. Xu, L. Zhang, R. Yan, Z. Su, D. Han, and Y. Yu. Mining social emotions from affective text. IEEE TKDE, 2011.
[3] D. Das and S. Bandyopadhyay. Sentence to document level emotion tagging­a coarse-grained study on bengali blogs. Advances in Pattern Recognition, 2010.
[4] K. Lin, C. Yang, and H. Chen. What emotions do news articles trigger in their readers? In SIGIR, pages 733­734, 2007.

1060

