How Query Extensions Reflect Search Result Abandonments

Aleksandr Chuklin
Yandex & Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology
Moscow, Russia
chuklin@yandex-team.ru
ABSTRACT
It is often considered that high abandonment rate corresponds to poor IR system performance. However several studies suggested that there are so called good abandonments, i.e. situations when search engine result page contains enough details to satisfy the user information need without necessity to click on search results. In this work we propose to look at query extensions. We will show that an extension by itself might motivate abandonment type (good or bad ) for the underlying query to some degree. We also propose a way to find potentially good abandonment extensions in an automated manner.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search and Retrieval
General Terms
Experimentation, Verification, Human Factors
Keywords
query log analysis, query reformulation, search result abandonments
1. INTRODUCTION
Abandonment rate is one of the most broadly used online user satisfaction metrics to evaluate the quality of information retrieval (IR) system. It is often considered that high abandonment rate corresponds to poor IR system performance. However in [4] it was suggested that some abandonments might be good : user decided not to click on search results because her information need were satisfied with a search engine result page (SERP) itself. Such situations were further studied in [3] where cursor movements were proposed to measure user satisfaction when no clicks had been issued. In all previous works authors relied on human judgements to decide whether particular query resulted in a good abandonment or not without evaluating actual user behavior. Work [1] even suggested that users tend to go to the original document (click on the page/URL) even if the snippet shows the information they were needed. So, we wanted to find real-world evidence for these good abandonments.
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR'12, August 12­16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA. ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

Pavel Serdyukov
Yandex Moscow, Russia
pavser@yandex-team.ru

2. METHOD
We started with the query log of a large commercial search engine. We extracted queries that were issued at least 10 times in 10-days period and calculated abandonment rate. We say that the query q was abandoned if it was not followed by any click on a search result item's url/image. If we had some clickable ads or Answers1 present we counted these clicks as usual. If the query was followed by another search request and user did not return to the query q we still mark q as abandoned.
After that we performed automated extraction of query extensions. If query q matched pattern "s q" or "q s" for some query q and some suffix/prefix s (s consists of one or more words) and queries q and q were both present in our dataset D, we said that q is an extended query for q: q = e(q), where function e is parametrized by either suffix or prefix. Then we compared abandonment rates a for the query q and its extended variant q . For each extension e we calculated the following value:

(e) = M edian

a(e(q)) a(q)

q  D & e(q)  D

(1)

If the value is greater than 1 we may claim that this particular extension e increases abandonment rate, being applied to the query. We have an intuition that some query extensions may correspond to very specific information needs that can easily be answered directly on a search engine result page. The top and the bottom  values are presented in Table 1.
We performed hand labeling of 190 popular query extensions found in our dataset2. The question was similar to that used in [4] to find potential good abandonment queries: "Given an extension e is it true that queries with such an extension have a dominant information need that could theoretically be achieved by an internet search engine result page?". As in [4] possible answers were "yes", "no" or "maybe". In order to confirm correlation of  value and potential good abandonment label we sorted all extensions according to  (in descending order) and split them to 10 bins of equal size. Label distribution in each bin is visualized in the Figure 1. We can see that the portion of potential good abandonments decreases with decrease of  while the portion of potential bad abandonments increases. Some deviations from this trend may be motivated by poor search

1As in [2] we use the notion of Answers: specially designed
search result items. 2Queries with such extensions represent 4% of all search
engine traffic.

1087

Table 1: Query Extensions (translated)

extension



Finnish (translate)

2.584

Polish (translate)

2.150

author (who is the author of . . . ?)

2.014

English (translate)

1.758

qt (programming)

1.727

Schengen

1.705

post code

1.649

Tatar (translate)

1.519

capital (what is the capital of . . . ?) 1.410

credit (credit program)

1.363

...

...

visual basic (programming)

0.551

dating

0.550

auto

0.540

map

0.520

official site (of some company/person) 0.508

Kazakh (translate)

0.504

c# (programming)

0.494

points of interest

0.387

ipod (soft)

0.304

top 40

0.293

result quality, unusual user behavior or the expert's uncer-

tainty.

It is important to note that we did not perform labeling

of the SERPs (we labeled extensions only). As it was shown

in [1] user behavior on good-looking SERPs may not neces-

sarily result in abandonment: 68% of participants said that

they still click on the page/URL even if the snippet shows

the information they were looking for. So we decided to have

clean assessors instructions in order to avoid problems with

rating process.

We also experimented with a somewhat different task. We

provided assessors not only with extension itself but also with a small sample of extended queries3 with this exten-

sion. That different task resulted in almost identical label-

ing and we decided not to include the results to this work.

It was interesting finding that information contained in an

extension itself is generally sufficient to determine potential

abandonment type.

CORRELATION. In order to compute numerical repre-

sentation of the results shown in the Figure 1 we calculated

correlation value of potential abandonment type and . For

each extension ei we computed xi = i - 1 and  1 if ei was marked as potentially good

yi

=

0-1if

ei was marked as maybe if ei was marked as potentially

bad

Once we have two vectors x and y we can compute correla-

tion coefficient:

Corr(x, y) = x =

n i=1

wi(xi

-

x)(yi

-

y

)

n i=1

wi(xi

-

x)2

n i=1

wi(yi

-

y )2

n i=1

wi xi

n i=1

wi

,

y

=

n i=1

wi yi

n i=1

wi

where w is a weight vector.

3we used 10

Figure 1:  and Potential Good Abandonments
If we used unit weight vector, we got correlation equal to 0.507. When we set wi equal to the number of different queries used with the extension ei we got correlation equal to 0.518.
3. DISCUSSION
In this paper we performed analysis of query extensions and their effects on query abandonments. We found that some extensions usually result in higher abandonment rate while others decrease abandonment rate dramatically. By performing hand labeling we found that median abandonment ratio is correlated with potential abandonment type of the extension: potentially bad extensions decrease abandonment rate while potentially good extensions increase it. These results may be exploited by search engines to improve Answers quality4. Now rules to fire an Answer are usually selected by humans and do not necessarily reflect actual user needs. In this work we showed that queries with several extensions (with high  value) are very likely to be good abandonments and therefore are good candidates to be presented with Answers. For this task we need to filter out queries with Answer already present and sort the extensions according to the  value. We did not show the results here, but they look very similar giving us weighted correlation with potential good abandonment equal to 0.588 and unweighted correlation equal to 0.469.
4. REFERENCES
[1] O. Alonso, R. Baeza-Yates, and M. Gertz. Effectiveness of temporal snippets. In WWW'09.
[2] L. Chilton and J. Teevan. Addressing people's information needs directly in a web search result page. In WWW'11.
[3] J. Huang, R. R. W. White, and S. Dumais. No clicks, no problem: using cursor movements to understand and improve search. In CHI'11.
[4] J. Li, S. Huffman, and A. Tokuda. Good abandonment in mobile and PC internet search. In SIGIR'09.
4See [2] for a detailed analysis of Answers.

1088

