Predicting Lifespans of Popular Tweets in Microblog

Shoubin Kong and Ling Feng
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology
Dept. of CS&T, Tsinghua University Beijing, China
kongsb09@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn fengling@tsinghua.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
In microblog like Twitter, popular tweets are usually retweeted by many users. For different tweets, their lifespans (i.e., how long they will stay popular) vary. This paper presents a simple yet effective approach to predict the lifespans of popular tweets based on their static characteristics and dynamic retweeting patterns. For a potentially popular tweet, we generate a time series based on its first-hour retweeting information, and compare it with those of historic tweets of the same author and post time (at the granularity of hour). The top-k historic tweets are identified, whose mean lifespan is estimated as the lifespan of the new tweet. Our experiments on a three-month real data set from Tencent Microblog demonstrate the effectiveness of the approach. Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search and Retrieval General Terms: Algorithms, performance. Keywords: Tweet, popularity, lifespan, prediction, time series.
1. INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, microblog has become one of the most popular social network services, used by billions of people all over the world. In microblog, popular information usually spreads incredibly rapidly through users' retweeting behaviors. Predicting tweets' popularity is desirable for a large scope of applications like burst events detection, microblog advertisement and real-time recommendation, etc. Such popularity prediction involves two issues: 1) how popular a tweet will be (i.e., popularity degree) and 2) how long a tweet will stay popular (i.e., popularity lifespan). A bundle of research has recently been carried on to address the first issue. Hong et al. [2] predicted tweets' popularity using a classification method. Cui et al. [1] proposed an HF-NMF approach to predict how many friends of a user in a Facebook-like social network service would share the same content as the user forwarded.
This paper examines the second issue, aiming to predict lifespans of tweets in microblog. To our knowledge, this is the first attempt in the literature to address the prediction problem of tweets' lifespans. Different from traditional microblog analysis methods, we do not focus on semantic un-
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). SIGIR'12, August 12­16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA. Copyright 2012 ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08 ...$10.00.

Guozheng Sun and Kan Luo
Tencent, SOSO Beijing, China
gordonsun@tencent.com raymondluo@tencent.com
derstanding of tweets and social graphs of microblog users. Instead, we explore the use of historic tweets with similar static and dynamic characteristics for prediction. After a tweet is posted, we collect its retweeting amount within the first one hour. If the amount is greater than a certain threshold (say 100), it is regarded as a popular tweet, and we then formulate its retweeting amounts at different time intervals of the first one hour into a time series. We identify a set of historic tweets with the same author and post time (at the granularity of hour), and find from them the top-k tweets with similar retweeting patterns. The mean lifespan of the top-k tweets is computed as the estimated lifespan of the new tweet. We evaluate our method on the real data set from Tencent Microblog, which has the largest number of users (over 200 millions) in China. The experimental results show our approach outperforms the baseline approaches.
2. PROBLEM AND SOLUTION
To predict the lifespans of popular tweets, we first define the notions of popular tweets and lifespan based on the following observations. We investigated a two-month collection of tweets in 2011 and observe that
· after a tweet is posted, its retweeting amount at the beginning hours reflects whether the tweet is popular or not within the next few days.
· almost 100% of tweets are rarely retweeted after 72 hours since they are posted. In other words, the retweeting amount of tweets almost achieves the maximum within the first 72 hours after posted.
Definition 1. A tweet is a popular tweet if its retweeting amount within the first 1 hour is no less than a certain threshold.
Definition 2. For a popular tweet, its lifespan is the hours that have passed when its retweeting amount reaches 95% of the total retweeting amount. In this study, the retweeting amount in 72 hours is approximately taken as the total retweeting amount.
For a popular tweet, we predict its lifespan based on historic tweets with similar characteristics.
First, candidate tweets with similar static characteristics are identified. Two aspects are considered in the study. 1) Post time of the tweet. The time when a tweet is posted impacts its retweeting pattern. For example, the retweeting pattern of a tweet posted at 5 am is different from that

1129

Real Lifespan (hour) 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70

posted at 5 pm. 2) Author of the tweet. Different microblog users have different followers with diverse characteristics in terms of retweeting behavior, active involvement, follower composition, interest, etc. We gather historic tweets with the same author and post time as the one to be predicted.
Second, top-k historic tweets are found from the candidate tweet set based on the similar dynamic retweeting pattern. To do that, we partition the first one hour into N number of equal time intervals, where N = 2n + 1 (n = 0, 1, . . .). We then count the retweeting amount of the tweet during each time interval. The tweet's retweeting amounts at consecutively different time intervals thus formulate a time series RT S = RC1, RC2, . . . , RCN .
The distance between two time series is defined as the Euclidian distance:

dist(RT S, RT S ) =

(RCm - RCm)2.

mN

Note that influential time intervals with more contribution

to the similarity could be picked up and enforced with dif-

ferent weights here. For instance, we could pick up the first,

middle, and last time intervals of RT S, RC1, RCn, RC2n+1 , to characterize the retweeting trend of the tweet.

Third, after obtaining the top-k similar historic tweets

{T1, T2, . . . , Tk}, their mean lifespan is calculated as the estimated lifespan of the tweet to be predicted:

k
Lif eSpanp(T ) = 1/k  Lif eSpan(Ti).
i=1

3. PERFORMANCE
We evaluated our lifespan prediction approach on the real data set from Tencent Microblog. We collected the retweeting information of all the tweets from October 1, 2011 to December 31, 2011, and filtered out potentially unpopular tweets whose first-hour retweeting amounts are less than 100. We took the tweets of the first two months, total 229666, as the historic tweet set, and the tweets of the third month, total 118471, as the test set.
The Root Mean Square Error (RMSE ) is used as the evaluation metric. The smaller RMSE is, the better the performance is. Let X be the total number of tweets for prediction, Lif eSpanp(Ti) and Lif eSpant(Ti) be the predicted and real lifespan of the i-th tweet.
X
RM SE = 1/X  (Lif eSpanp(Ti) - Lif eSpant(Ti))2.
i=1
The value of k is set to 5, because our experiments show that the improvement is not obvious when k is over 5. fhrc (first-hour retweeting count) is the retweeting amount of a tweet during the first hour after it is posted.
The Q-Q plot [3] of the predicted lifespan and real lifespan is shown in Fig.1. As illustrated in Fig.1, the distribution of predicted lifespan matches that of the real lifespan well, especially when the lifespan lasts for 20-40 hours. Due to the insufficient number of historic tweets and the average method, the predicted value is less than the real one for tweets with over 50-hour lifespan in the data set, which will be considered in our future work.
We further compare our approach with three baseline algorithms, which are kNN (k-Nearest Neighbors), SVR (Support Vector Regression), and LR (Linear Regression). ATRkNN approach considers identical author, similar post time and retweeting pattern, AR-kNN approach considers identical author and retweeting pattern, and TR-kNN approach

   
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 Predicted Lifespan (hour)
Figure 1: The Q-Q plot of the predicted lifespan and real lifespan for tweets with fhrc>=1000

considers similar post time and retweeting pattern. Table 1 shows the prediction performance in RMSE by different methods.

Table 1: Performance Comparison (RMSE ) tweets with tweets with tweets with
fhrc>=100 fhrc>=500 fhrc>=1000

ATR-kNN AR-kNN TR-kNN
kNN SVR LR

9.22 9.34 11.60 11.94 13.01 29.14

7.39 7.79 11.00 11.36 10.71 17.99

6.60 6.97 10.86 11.22 9.67 15.73

From Table 1, three conclusions can be made. 1) The proposed ATR-kNN approach outperforms the baseline algorithms (kNN, SVR and LR), achieving the best performance under different fhrc values. 2) The two static characteristics emphasized in our approach do contribute to the prediction performance, and the author requirement plays a more important role than the post time of the tweets. 3) The more the fhrc is, the better performance our approach achieves. This demonstrates that our approach is effective to deal with popular tweets.
Acknowledgments
The work is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (60773156, 61073004), Chinese Major State Basic Research Development 973 Program (2011CB3022032), Important National Science & Technology Specific Program (2011ZX01042-001-002-2), and the research fund of Tsinghua-Tencent Joint Laboratory for Internet Innovation Technology.
4. REFERENCES
[1] P. Cui, F. Wang, S. Liu, M. Ou, S. Yang, and L. Sun. Who should share what? item-level social influence prediction for users and posts ranking. In SIGIR, pages 185­194, 2011.
[2] L. Hong, O. Dan, and B. Davison. Predicting popular messages in twitter. In WWW, pages 57­58, 2011.
[3] M. Wilk and R. Gnanadesikan. Probability plotting methods for the analysis for the analysis of data. Biometrika, 55(1):1­17, 1968.

1130

